
Cloud computing enables end users to execute
high-performance computing applications by renting the required computing power. This pay-for-use approach enables
small enterprises and startups to run HPC-related businesses
with a significant saving in capital investment and a short time
to market.

When deploying an application in the cloud, the users may
a) fail to understand the interactions of the application with the
software layers implementing the cloud system, &) be unaware
of some hardware details of the cloud system, and c) fail
to understand how sharing part of the cloud system with
other users might degrade application performance. These
misunderstandings may lead the users to select suboptimal
cloud configurations in terms of cost or performance.

To aid the users in selecting the optimal cloud configuration
for their applications, we suggest that the cloud provider
generate a prediction model for the provided system. We
propose applying machine-learning techniques to generate this
prediction model. First, the cloud provider profiles a set of
training applications by means of a hardware-independent
profiler and then executes these applications on a set of training
cloud configurations to collect actual performance values. The
prediction model is trained to learn the dependencies of
actual performance data on the application profile and cloud
configuration parameters. The advantage of using a hardwareindependent profiler is that the cloud users and the cloud
provider can analyze applications on different machines and
interface with the same prediction model.

We validate the proposed methodology for a cloud system
implemented with OpenStack. We apply the prediction model
to the NAS parallel benchmarks. The resulting relative error is
below 15% and the Pareto optimal cloud configurations finally
found when maximizing application speed and minimizing
execution cost on the prediction model are also at most 15%
away from the actual optimal solutions.

