
A memory-hard function (MHF) f, with parameter n can be computed in sequential time and space n. Simultaneously, a high amortized parallel area-time complexity (aAT) is incurred per evaluation.
In practice, MHFs are used to limit the rate at which an adversary
(using a custom computational device) can evaluate a security sensitive function that still occasionally needs to be evaluated by honest
users (using an off-the-shelf general purpose device). The most
prevalent examples of such sensitive functions are Key Derivation
Functions (KDFs) and password hashing algorithms where rate
limits help mitigate off-line dictionary attacks. As the honest users’
inputs to these functions are often (low-entropy) passwords special
attention is given to a class of side-channel resistant MHFs called
iMHFs.

Essentially all iMHFs can be viewed as some mode of operation
(making n calls to some round function) given by a directed acyclic
graph (DAG) with very low indegree. Recently, a combinatorial
property of a DAG has been identified (called “depth-robustness”)
which results in good provable security for an iMHF based on
that DAG. Depth-robust DAGs have also proven useful in other
cryptographic applications. Unfortunately, up till now, all known
very depth-robust DAGs are impractically complicated and little
is known about their exact (i.e. non-asymptotic) depth-robustness
both in theory and in practice.

In this work we build and analyze (both formally and empirically)
several exceedingly simple and efficient to navigate practical DAGs
for use in iMHFs and other applications. For each DAG we:

e Prove that their depth-robustness is asymptotically maximal.

e Prove bounds of at least 3 orders of magnitude better on
their exact depth-robustness compared to known bounds
for other practical iMHF.

e Implement and empirically evaluate their depth-robustness
and aAT against a variety of state-of-the art (and several


new) depth-reduction and low aAT attacks. We find that,
against all attacks, the new DAGs perform significantly
better in practice than Argon2i, the most widely deployed
iMHF in practice.
Along the way we also improve the best known empirical attacks on
the aAT of Argon2i by implementing and testing several heuristic
versions of a (hitherto purely theoretical) depth-reduction attack.
Finally, we demonstrate practicality of our constructions by modifying the Argon2i code base to use one of the new high aAT DAGs.
Experimental benchmarks on a standard off-the-shelf CPU show
that the new modifications do not adversely affect the impressive
throughput of Argon2i (despite seemingly enjoying significantly
higher aAT).

