
While the memory footprints of cloud and HPC applications
continue to increase, fundamental issues with DRAM scaling are
likely to prevent traditional main memory systems, composed
of monolithic DRAM, from greatly growing in capacity. Hybrid
memory systems can mitigate the scaling limitations of monolithic DRAM by pairing together multiple memory technologies
(e.g., different types of DRAM, or DRAM and non-volatile memory) at the same level of the memory hierarchy. The goal of a
hybrid main memory is to combine the different advantages of
the multiple memory types in a cost-effective manner while
avoiding the disadvantages of each technology. Memory pages are placed in and migrated between the different memories
within a hybrid memory system, based on the properties of each
page. It is important to make intelligent page management (i.e.,
placement and migration) decisions, as they can significantly
affect system performance.

In this paper, we propose utility-based hybrid memory management (UH-MEM), a new page management mechanism
for various hybrid memories, that systematically estimates the
utility (i.e. the system performance benefit) of migrating a page
between different memory types, and uses this information to
guide data placement. UH-MEM operates in two steps. First, it
estimates how much a single application would benefit from
migrating one of its pages to a different type of memory, by
comprehensively considering access frequency, row buffer locality, and memory-level parallelism. Second, it translates the
estimated benefit of a single application to an estimate of the
overall system performance benefit from such a migration.

We evaluate the effectiveness of UH-MEM with various types
of hybrid memories, and show that it significantly improves
system performance on each of these hybrid memories. For a
memory system with DRAM and non-volatile memory, UHMEM improves performance by 14% on average (and up to 26%)
compared to the best of three evaluated state-of-the-art mechanisms across a large number of data-intensive workloads.

