

We introduce the design and implementation of FreeRider,
the first system that enables backscatter communication with
multiple commodity radios, such as 802.11g/n WiFi, ZigBee,
and Bluetooth, while these radios are simultaneously used
for productive data communication. Furthermore, we are,
to our knowledge, the first to implement and evaluate a
multi-tag system. The key technique used by FreeRider is
codeword translation, where a tag can transform a codeword
present in the original excitation signal into another valid
codeword from the same codebook during backscattering.
In other words, the backscattered signal is still a valid WiFi,
ZigBee, or Bluetooth signal. Therefore, commodity radios decode the backscattered signal and extract the tag’s embedded
information. More importantly, FreeRider does codeword
translation regardless of the data transmitted by these radios.
Therefore, these radios can still do productive data communication. FreeRider accomplishes codeword translation by
modifying one or more of the three dimensions of a wireless
signal — amplitude, phase and frequency. A tag ensures that
the modified signal is still comprised of valid codewords that
come the same codebook as the original excitation signal. We
built a hardware prototype of FreeRider, and our empirical
evaluations show a data rate of ~60kbps in single tag mode,
15kbps in multi-tag mode, and a backscatter communication
distance up to 42m when operating on 802.11g/n WiFi.

CCS CONCEPTS

« Networks — Network architectures; Wireless access
networks;

 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request
permissions from permissions@acm.org.

CoNEXT ’17, Incheon, Republic of Korea

© 2017 ACM. 978-1-4503-5422-6/17/12...$15.00

DOI: 10.1145/3143361.3143374

389

KEYWORDS
Backscatter; WiFi; ZigBee; Bluetooth; Wireless

