
GPU adoption for general purpose computing has
been accelerating. To support a large number of concurrently
active threads, GPUs are provisioned with a very large register
file (RF). The RF power consumption is a critical concern. One
option to reduce the power consumption dramatically is to
use near-threshold voltage(NTV) to operate the RF. However,
operating MOSFET devices at NTV is fraught with stability
and reliability concerns. The adoption of FinFET devices in
chip industry is providing a promising path to operate the
RF at NTV while satisfactorily tackling the stability and
reliability concerns. However, the fundamental problem of NTV
operation, namely slow access latency, remains. To tackle this
challenge in this paper we propose to build a partitioned RF
using FinFET technology. The partitioned RF design exploits
our observation that applications exhibit strong preference to
utilize a small subset of their registers. One way to exploit
this behavior is to cache the RF content as has been proposed
in recent works. However, caching leads to unnecessary area
overheads since a fraction of the RF must be replicated.
Furthermore, we show that caching is not efficient as we
increase the number of issued instructions per cycle, which is
the expected trend in GPU designs. The proposed partitioned
RF splits the registers into two partitions: the highly accessed
registers are stored in a small RF that switches between
high and low power modes. We use the FinFET’s back gate
control to provide low overhead switching between the two
power modes. The remaining registers are stored in a large
RF partition that always operates at NTV. The assignment of
the registers to the two partitions will be based on statistics
collected by the a hybrid profiling technique that combines the
compiler based profiling and the pilot warp profiling technique
proposed in this paper. The partitioned FinFET RF is able to
save 39% and 54% of the RF leakage and the dynamic energy,
respectively, and suffers less than 2% performance overhead.

