
The world has become a global village and transforming into advance modern society by applying the
technology has a strong influence in every aspect of our latest smart city technology [1].
daily lives and the fourth industrial revolution that will Smart Education is referred to intelligence of educational
alter the way we live and learn. This inter-connectivity environment, resources, management and services which is
brings a need for greater engagement, experience and used to achieve a positive interaction among its bodies.
efficiency. Catch a sign on a day in a life of a student and Smart Education regards information processing as the
how connectivity and technology helps enrich his/her carrier, and intelligent operation as a measure of it [2].
daily activities. This research aims to study the Smart Education integrates smart tools that are designed
beneficiary of adopting Smart Education technology and developed to be as supplemental intelligent tools. In
among United Arab Emirates (UAE) Universities. This addition, it can also be adjusted to fulfill the students’
type of education is becoming a dominant in academia creative minds. Smart Education has vast horizons of
especially within universities around the globe. Since it knowledge that students can obtain instead of reading the
was introduced, it demonstrates a significant change in lines of their collage textbooks. For instance, in the field of
educational instructional methods. The objective of this | medicine, the learner can enter virtually the human body and
research is to investigate Smart Education instruments recognize its parts using the smart table rather than study
much as its significance and demands. This research used from non-interactive components (e.g. textbooks, web page,
different tools for assessment. Surveys and interviews etc.). In the field of Information Security major, students use
were conducted to group of universities learners and virtual environment to simulate attack scenarios against
educators within the higher education system in the UAE. smart city module instead of the physical system. Smart
The outcome of the research has shown a significant Education creates new capabilities such as 3D educational
support towards the usage of the Smart tools and virtual keyboard [3]. Smart Education creates new industries,
technologies. The survey has also indicated that 72% of for instance; several companies developed the best
the participants preferred the technology approach interactive virtual lab software which is used for connecting
within their curriculum. The research highlighted that teachers and students [4]. Also, the student can enter
there is a great impact of using the Smart technology virtually into a tiny flash-memory and identify its
tools. In the Future, the authors would like to investigate components through smart glasses tool. On the other hand,
the risk of adopting such educational approach. sixth sense technology and virtual laser projected keyboard
are one of these interactive tools that aid the process smart

