

The evolution of cloud-computing imposes many challenges
on performance testing and requires not only a different
approach and methodology of performance evaluation and
analysis, but also specialized tools and frameworks to support such work. In traditional performance testing, typically a single workload was run against a static test configuration. The main metrics derived from such experiments
included throughput, response times, and system utilization
at steady-state. While this may have been sufficient in the
past, where in many cases a single application was run on
dedicated hardware, this approach is no longer suitable for
cloud-based deployments. Whether private or public cloud,
such environments typically host a variety of applications on
distributed shared hardware resources, simultaneously accessed by a large number of tenants running heterogeneous
workloads. The number of tenants as well as their activity and resource needs dynamically change over time, and
the cloud infrastructure reacts to this by reallocating existing or provisioning new resources. Besides metrics such as
the number of tenants and overall resource utilization, performance testing in the cloud must be able to answer many
more questions: How is the quality of service of a tenant impacted by the constantly changing activity of other tenants?
How long does it take the cloud infrastructure to react to
changes in demand, and what is the effect on tenants while it
does so? How well are service level agreements met? What
is the resource consumption of individual tenants? How can
global performance metrics on application- and system-level
in a distributed system be correlated to an individual tenant’s perceived performance?

In this paper we present CloudPerf, a performance test
framework specifically designed for distributed and dynamic
multi-tenant environments, capable of answering all of the
above questions, and more. CloudPerf consists of a distributed harness, a protocol-independent load generator and
workload modeling framework, an extensible statistics framework with live-monitoring and post-analysis tools, interfaces
for cloud deployment operations, and a rich set of both lowlevel as well as high-level workloads from different domains.

