
To reduce energy consumption and carbon emission, many data centers have deployed (or anticipate to build)
their own renewable-energy power plants. However, the renewable energy (such as wind, tide, and solar energy) has the serious
issues of intermittency and variability that prevent the green
energy from being utilized effectively in practice. To cope with
the issues, new power-supply management policies and workload
scheduling algorithms have been designed. However, most existing
work focuses on power optimization on computation only. In
this paper, we introduce a novel scheme called OptiMatch to
optimize the match between the power supply and the userworkload demand for massive storage systems that are mostly
powered by renewable energy sources. OptiMatch has a hierarchical architecture, which consists of a number of heterogeneous storage devices. OptiMatch systematically utilizes the
performance disparities between heterogeneous storage devices
(i.e., performance per watt, IOPS/watt) to split the process for
every write request into two stages: an on-line stage and a
deferred off-line stage. The deferred off-line requests are used
to match the green energy supplies. To maximize green energy
utilization and minimize power budget without sacrificing quality
of service, the fundamental methodology is to make the aggregate
power supplies be proportional to the I/O workload demand
at any time. To this end, our OptiMatch employs novel codesign optimizations. (1) We propose a dual-drive power control
approach that makes the number of active nodes proportional to
the workload demand when the green power supply is insufficient,
meanwhile be proportional to the green power supply when
green power is sufficient. (2) During periods of insufficient
green supplies, we exploit virtualization consolidation schemes
which enable a fine-grained power control to minimize the grid
budgets. (3) During the periods of sufficient green supplies, we
design an intelligent workload scheduling scheme which enables a
near-optimal off-line requests assignment to maximize the green
utilization. The experimental results demonstrate that the new
OptiMatch framework can achieve high green utilization (up to
94.9%) with a minor performance degradation (less than 9.8%).

