
Today’s GPUs continue to increase the number of
compute resources with each new generation. Many data-parallel
applications have been re-engineered to leverage the thousands
of cores on the GPU. But not every kernel can fully utilize
all the resources available. Many applications contain multiple
kernels that could potentially be run concurrently. To better
utilize the massive resources on the GPU, device vendors have
started to support Concurrent Kernel Execution (CKE). However,
the application throughput provided by CKE is subject to a
number of factors, including the kernel configuration attributes,
the dynamic behavior of each kernel (e.g., compute-intentive
vs. memory-intensive), the kernel launch order and inter-kernel
dependencies. Minor changes in any of theses factors can have a
large impact on the effectiveness of CKE.
In this paper, we present Moka, an empirical model for tuning
concurrent kernel performance. Moka allows us to accurately
predict the resulting performance and scalability of multi-kernel
applications when using CKE. We consider both static and
dynamic workload characteristics that impact the utility of CKE,
and leverage these metrics to drive kernel scheduling decisions
on NVIDIA GPUs. The underlying data transfer pattern and
GPU resource contention are analyzed in detail. Our model is
able to accurately predict the performance ceiling of concurrent
kernel execution. We validate our model using several real-world
applications that have multiple kernels that can run concurrently,
and evaluate CKE performance on a NVIDIA Maxwell GPU. Our
model is able to predict the performance of CKE applications
accurately, providing estimates that differ by less than 12% as
compared to actual runtime performance. Using our estimates,
we can quickly find the best CKE strategy for our applications
to achieve improved application throughput. We believe we
have developed a useful tool to aid application programmers to
accelerate their applications using CKE.
