
Modern computer systems are accelerator-rich,
equipped with many types of hardware accelerators to speed
up computation. For example, graphics processing units (GPUs)
are a type of accelerators that are widely employed to accelerate
parallel workloads. In order to well utilize different accelerators
to gain better execution time speedup or reduce total energy
consumption, many scheduling algorithms have been proposed
to select the optimal target device to process an OpenCL kernel
according to the kernel’s individual characteristics. However, in
a real computer system, there are a lot of workloads co-located
together on a single machine and would be processed on different
devices simultaneously. The CPU cores and accelerators may contend shared resources, such as the host main memory and shared
last-level cache. Thus, it is not robust to schedule an OpenCL
kernel execution by simply considering the characteristics of the
kernel. To maximize the system throughput, it is important to
consider the execution behavior of all co-located applications
when performing OpenCL kernel execution scheduling.

In this paper, we provide a detailed characterization study
demonstrating that scheduling an OpenCL kernel to run on
different devices can introduce varying performance impact
to itself and the other co-located applications due to memory
interference. Based on the characterization results, we then
develop a light-weight, scalable performance degradation predictor specifically for heterogeneous computer systems, called
HeteroPDP. HeteroPDP aims to dynamically predict and balance
the execution time slowdown of all co-located applications in
a heterogeneous computation environment. Our real system
evaluation results show that comparing with always running an
OpenCL kernel on the host CPU, HeteroPDP is able to achieve
3X execution time speedup when an OpenCL kernel runs alone
and improve the system fairness from 24% to 65% when an
OpenCL kernel is co-located with other applications.
