
Scale-out infrastructure such as Cloud is built
upon a large network of multi-core processors. Performance,
power consumption, and capital cost of such infrastructure
depend on the overall system configuration including number of
processing cores, core frequency, memory hierarchy and
capacity, number of memory channels, and memory data rate.
Among these parameters, memory subsystem is known to be one
of the performance bottlenecks, contributing significantly to the
overall capital and operational cost of the server. Also, given the
rise of Big Data and analytics applications, this could potentially
pose an even bigger challenge to the performance of cloud
applications and cost of cloud infrastructure. Hence it is
important to understand the role of memory subsystem in cloud
infrastructure and in particular for this emerging class of
applications. Despite the increasing interest in recent years, little
work has been done in understanding memory requirements
trends and developing accurate and effective models to predict
performance and cost of memory subsystem. Currently there is
no well-defined methodology for selecting a memory
configuration that reduces execution time and power
consumption by considering the capital and operational cost of
cloud. In this paper, through a comprehensive real-system
empirical analysis of performance, we address these challenges
by first characterizing diverse types of scale-out applications
across a wide range of memory configuration parameters. The
characterization helps to accurately capture applications’
behavior and derive a model to predict their performance. Based
on the developed predictive model, we propose MeNa, which is a
methodology to maximize the performance/cost ratio of scale-out
applications running in cloud environment. MeNa navigates
memory and processor parameters to find the system
configuration for a given application and a given budget, to
maximum performance. Compared to brute force method, MeNa
achieves more than 90% accuracy for identifying the right
configuration parameters to maximize performance/cost ratio.
Moreover, we show how MeNa can be effectively leveraged for
server designers to find architectural insights or subscribers to
allocate just enough budget to maximize performance of their
applications in cloud.
