
The chip industry faces two key challenges today the impending end of Moore’s Law and the rising costs of chip
design and verification (millions of dollars today). Heterogeneous
IPs - cores and domain-specific accelerators - are a promising
answer to the first challenge, enabling performance and energy
benefits no longer provided by technology scaling. IP-reuse
with plug-and-play designs can help with the second challenge,
amortizing NRE costs tremendously. A key requirement in a
heterogeneous IP-based plug-and-play SoC environment is an
interconnection fabric to connect these IPs together. This fabric
needs to be scalable - low latency, low energy and low area and yet be flexible/parametrizable for use across designs. The
key scalability challenge in any Network-on-Chip (NoC) today is
that the latency increases proportional to the number of hops.

In this work, we present a NoC generator called OpenSMART,
which generates low-latency NoCs based on SMART'. SMART
is a recently proposed NoC microarchitecture that enables multihop on-chip traversals within a single cycle, removing the
dependence of latency on hops. SMART leverages wire delay of
the underlying repeated wires, and augments each router with
the ability to request and setup bypass paths. OpenSMART takes
SMART from a NoC optimization to a design methodology for
SoCs, enabling users to generate verified RTL for a class of userspecified network configurations, such as network size, topology,
routing algorithm, number of VCs/buffers, router pipeline stages,
and so on. OpenSMART also provides the ability to generate
any heterogeneous topology with low and high-radix routers
and optimized single-stage pipelines, leveraging fast logic delays
in technology nodes today. OpenSMART v1.0 comes with both
Bluespec System Verilog and Chisel implementations, and this
paper also presents a case study of our experiences with both
languages. OpenSMART is available for download’ and is going
to be a key addition to the emerging open-source hardware
movement, providing a glue for interconnecting existing and
emerging IPs .

