
Die-stacked DRAM (a.k.a., on-chip DRAM) provides much higher bandwidth and lower latency than off-chip
DRAM. It is a promising technology to break the “memory
wall’. Die-stacked DRAM can be used either as a cache (i.e.,
DRAM cache) or as a part of memory (PoM). A DRAM cache
design would suffer from more page faults than a PoM design
as the DRAM cache cannot contribute towards capacity of main
memory. At the same time, obtaining high performance requires
PoM systems to swap requested data to the die-stacked DRAM.
Existing PoM designs fall into two categories — line-based
and page-based. The former ensures low off-chip bandwidth
utilization but suffers from a low hit ratio of on-chip memory
due to limited temporal locality. In contrast, page-based designs
achieve a high hit ratio of on-chip memory albeit at the cost
of moving large amounts of data between on-chip and off-chip
memories, leading to increased off-chip bandwidth utilization and
significant system performance degradation.

To achieve a similar high hit ratio of on-chip memory as pagebased designs, and eliminate excessive off-chip traffic involved,
we propose SELF, a high performance and bandwidth efficient
approach. The key idea is to SElectively swap Lines in a requested
page that are likely to be accessed according to page Footprint,
instead of blindly swapping an entire page. In doing so, SELF
allows incoming requests to be serviced from the on-chip memory
as much as possible, while avoiding swapping unused lines to
reduce memory bandwidth consumption. We evaluate a memory
system which consists of 4GB on-chip DRAM and 12GB offchip DRAM. Compared to a baseline system that has the same
total capacity of 16GB off-chip DRAM, SELF improves the
performance in terms of instructions per cycle by 26.9%, and
reduces the energy consumption per memory access by 47.9% on
average. In contrast, state-of-the-art line-based and page-based
PoM designs can only improve the performance by 9.5% and
9.9%, respectively, against the same baseline system.

