
Java 8 retrofitted lambda expressions, a core feature of functional programming, into a mainstream objectoriented language with an imperative paradigm. However, we do not know how Java developers have adapted
to the functional style of thinking, and more importantly, what are the reasons that motivate Java developers to
adopt functional programming. Without such knowledge, researchers miss opportunities to improve the state
of the art, tool builders use unrealistic assumptions, language designers fail to improve upon their designs,
and developers are unable to explore efficient and effective use of lambdas.
We present the first large-scale, quantitative and qualitative empirical study to shed light on how imperative
programmers use lambda expressions as a gateway into functional thinking. Particularly, we statically scrutinize
the source code of 241 open-source projects with 19,770 contributors, to study the characteristics of 100,540
lambda expressions. Moreover, we investigate the historical trends and adoption rates of lambdas in the
studied projects. To get a complementary perspective, we seek the underlying reasons on why developers
introduce lambda expressions, by surveying 97 developers who are introducing lambdas in their projects,
using the firehouse interview method.
Among others, our findings revealed an increasing trend in the adoption of lambdas in Java: in 2016, the
ratio of lambdas introduced per added line of code increased by two-fold compared to 2015. Lambdas are
used for various reasons, including but not limited to (i) making existing code more succinct and readable,
(ii) avoiding code duplication, and (iii) simulating lazy evaluation of functions. Interestingly, we found out
that developers are using Java’s built-in functional interfaces inefficiently, i.e., they prefer to use generic
functional interfaces over the specialized ones, overlooking the performance overheads that might be imposed.
Furthermore, developers are not adopting techniques from functional programming, e.g., currying. Finally, we
present the implications of our findings for researchers, tool builders, language designers, and developers.
