
This paper presents Fast Instrumentation Bias (FIB), a sound and complete dynamic data race detection
algorithm that improves performance by reducing or eliminating the costs of analysis atomicity. In addition
to checking for errors in target programs, dynamic data race detectors must introduce synchronization to
guard against metadata races that may corrupt analysis state and compromise soundness or completeness.
Pessimistic analysis synchronization can account for nontrivial performance overhead in a data race detector.
The core contribution of FIB is a novel cooperative ownership-based synchronization protocol whose
states and transitions are derived purely from preexisting analysis metadata and logic in a standard data race
detection algorithm. By exploiting work already done by the analysis, FIB ensures atomicity of dynamic analysis
actions with zero additional time or space cost in the common case. Analysis of temporally thread-local or
read-shared accesses completes safely with no synchronization. Uncommon write-sharing transitions require
synchronous cross-thread coordination to ensure common cases may proceed synchronization-free.
We implemented FIB in the Jikes RVM Java virtual machine. Experimental evaluation shows that FIB
eliminates nearly all analysis atomicity costs on programs where data often experience windows of threadlocal access. Adaptive extensions to the ownership policy effectively eliminate high coordination costs of the
core ownership protocol on programs with high rates of serialized sharing. FIB outperforms a naïve pessimistic
synchronization scheme by 50% on average. Compared to a tuned optimistic metadata synchronization scheme
based on conventional one-grained atomic compare-and-swap operations, FIB is competitive overall, and up to
17% faster on some programs. Overall, FIB effectively exploits latent analysis and program invariants to bring
strong integrity guarantees to an otherwise unsynchronized data race detection algorithm at minimal cost.
