
Nakamoto’s famous blockchain protocol enables achieving consensus in a so-called permissionless setting—anyone can join (or leave)
the protocol execution, and the protocol instructions do not depend
on the identities of the players. His ingenious protocol prevents
“sybil attacks” (where an adversary spawns any number of new
players) by relying on computational puzzles (a.k.a. “moderately
hard functions”) introduced by Dwork and Naor (Crypto’92). Recent work by Garay et al (EuroCrypt’15) and Pass et al (manuscript,
2016) demonstrate that this protocol provably achieves consistency
and liveness assuming a) honest players control a majority of the
computational power in the network, b) the puzzle-hardness is appropriately set as a function of the maximum network delay and
the total computational power of the network, and c) the computational puzzle is modeled as a random oracle. Assuming honest
participation, however, is a strong assumption, especially in a setting where honest players are expected to perform a lot of work
(to solve the computational puzzles). In Nakamoto’s Bitcoin application of the blockchain protocol, players are incentivized to solve
these puzzles by receiving rewards for every “block” (of transactions) they contribute to the blockchain. An elegant work by Eyal
and Sirer (FinancialCrypt’14), strengthening and formalizing an
earlier attack discussed on the Bitcoin forum, demonstrates that a
coalition controlling even a minority fraction of the computational
power in the network can gain (close to) 2 times its “fair share” of
the rewards (and transaction fees) by deviating from the protocol
instructions. In contrast, in a fair protocol, one would expect that
players controlling a ¢ fraction of the computational resources to
reap a ¢ fraction of the rewards.

We present a new blockchain protocol—the FruitChain protocol—
which satisfies the same consistency and liveness properties as
Nakamoto’s protocol (assuming an honest majority of the computing power), and additionally is 6-approximately fair: with overwhelming probability, any honest set of players controlling a ¢
fraction of computational power is guaranteed to get at least a fraction (1 — 5)¢ of the blocks (and thus rewards) in any QS) length
segment of the chain (where x is the security parameter). Consequently, if this blockchain protocol is used as the ledger underlying
a cryptocurrency system, where rewards and transaction fees are
evenly distributed among the miners of blocks in a length x segment
of the chain, no coalition controlling less than a majority of the
computing power can gain more than a factor (1 + 36) by deviating
from the protocol (i.e., honest participation is an $ -coalition-safe
35-Nash equilibrium). Finally, the FruitChain protocol enables decreasing the variance of mining rewards and as such significantly

lessens (or even obliterates) the need for mining pools.
