

The widely-studied radio network model [Chlamtac and Kutten, 1985] is a graph-based description that captures the
inherent impact of collisions in wireless communication. In
this model, the strong assumption is made that node v receives a, message from a neighbor if and only if exactly one
of its neighbors broadcasts.

We relax this assumption by introducing a new noisy radio
network model in which random faults occur at senders or receivers. Specifically, for a constant noise parameter p € [0, 1),
either every sender has probability p of transmitting noise
or every receiver of a single transmission in its neighborhood
has probability p of receiving noise.

We first study single-message broadcast algorithms in noisy
radio networks and show that the Decay algorithm [BarYehuda et al., 1992] remains robust in the noisy model while
the diameter-linear algorithm of Gasieniec et al., 2007 does
not. We give a modified version of the algorithm of Gasieniec
et al., 2007 that is robust to sender and receiver faults, and
extend both this modified algorithm and the Decay algorithm
to robust multi-message broadcast algorithms, broadcasting

© (cogmigtogn) and 2 (sah)
tively.

We next investigate the extent to which (network) coding
improves throughput in noisy radio networks. In particular,
we study the coding cap — the ratio of the throughput of
coding to that of routing — in noisy radio networks. We
address the previously perplexing result of Alon et al. 2014
that worst case coding throughput is no better than worst
case routing throughput up to constants: we show that the
worst case throughput performance of coding is, in fact,
superior to that of routing — by a O(log(n)) gap — provided
receiver faults are introduced. However, we show that sender
faults have little effect on throughput. In particular, we show
that any coding or routing scheme for the noiseless setting
can be transformed to be robust to sender faults with only a
constant throughput overhead. These transformations imply
that the results of Alon et al., 2014 carry over to noisy radio
networks with sender faults as well. As a result, if sender
faults are introduced then there exist topologies for which
there is a O(loglogn) gap, but the worst case throughput

across all topologies is for both coding and routing.
