

Data is continuously generated by modern data sources, and
a recent challenge in machine learning has been to develop
techniques that perform well in an incremental (streaming) setting. A variety of offline machine learning tasks
are known to be feasible under differential privacy, where
generic construction exist that, given a large enough input
sample, perform tasks such as PAC learning, Empirical Risk
Minimization (ERM), regression, etc. In this paper, we investigate the problem of private machine learning, where as
common in practice, the data is not given at once, but rather
arrives incrementally over time.

We introduce the problems of private incremental ERM
and private incremental regression where the general goal
is to always maintain a good empirical risk minimizer for
the history observed under differential privacy. Our first
contribution is a generic transformation of private batch
ERM mechanisms into private incremental ERM mechanisms, based on a simple idea of invoking the private batch
ERM procedure at some regular time intervals. We take
this construction as a baseline for comparison. We then
provide two mechanisms for the private incremental regression problem. Our first mechanism is based on privately
constructing a noisy incremental gradient function, which is
then used in a modified projected gradient procedure at every timestep. This mechanism has an excess empirical risk
of = Vd, where d is the dimensionality of the data. While
from the results of Bassily e¢ al. [2] this bound is tight in
the worst-case, we show that certain geometric properties of
the input and constraint set can be used to derive significantly better results for certain interesting regression problems. Our second mechanism which achieves this is based on
the idea of projecting the data to a lower dimensional space
using random projections, and then adding privacy noise in
this low dimensional space. The mechanism overcomes the
issues of adaptivity inherent with the use of random projections in online streams, and uses recent developments in
high-dimensional estimation to achieve an excess empirical
risk bound of = T'/3w?/3, where T is the length of the
stream and W is the sum of the Gaussian widths of the
input domain and the constraint set that we optimize over.

