

This paper investigates the problem of reverse engineering,
i.e., learning, select-project-join (SPJ) queries from a userprovided example set, containing positive and negative tuples.
The goal is then to determine whether there exists a query
returning all the positive tuples, but none of the negative tuples, and furthermore, to find such a query, if it exists. These
are called the satisfiability and learning problems, respectively. The ability to solve these problems is an important
step in simplifying the querying process for non-expert users.

This paper thoroughly investigates the satisfiability and
learning problems in a variety of settings. In particular,
we consider several classes of queries, which allow different
combinations of the operators select, project and join. In
addition, we compare the complexity of satisfiability and
learning, when the query is, or is not, of bounded size. We
note that bounded-size queries are of particular interest, as
they can be used to avoid over-fitting (i.e., tailoring a query
precisely to only the seen examples).

In order to fully understand the underlying factors which
make satisfiability and learning (in)tractable, we consider
different components of the problem, namely, the size of a
query to be learned, the size of the schema and the number
of examples. We study the complexity of our problems, when
considering these as part of the input, as constants or as
parameters (i.e., as in parameterized complexity analysis).
Depending on the setting, the complexity of satisfiability
and learning can vary significantly. Among other results, our
analysis also provides new problems that are complete for
W|3], for which few natural problems are known. Finally, by
considering a variety of settings, we derive insight on how
the different facets of our problem interplay with the size of
the database, thereby providing the theoretical foundations
necessary for a future implementation of query learning from
examples.
