
Availability of large data sets like ImageNet and massively
parallel computation support in modern HPC devices like
NVIDIA GPUs have fueled a renewed interest in Deep
Learning (DL) algorithms. This has triggered the development of DL frameworks like Caffe, Torch, TensorFlow, and
CNTK. However, most DL frameworks have been limited to
a single node. In order to scale out DL frameworks and bring
HPC capabilities to the DL arena, we propose, S-Caffe; a
scalable and distributed Caffe adaptation for modern multiGPU clusters. With an in-depth analysis of new requirements
brought forward by the DL frameworks and limitations of
current communication runtimes, we present a co-design of
the Caffe framework and the MVAPICH2-GDR MPI runtime. Using the co-design methodology, we modify Caffe’s
workflow to maximize the overlap of computation and communication with multi-stage data propagation and gradient
aggregation schemes. We bring DL-Awareness to the MPI
runtime by proposing a hierarchical reduction design that
benefits from CUDA-Aware features and provides up to a
massive 133x speedup over OpenMPI and 2.6x speedup over
MVAPICH2 for 160 GPUs. S-Caffe successfully scales up to
160 K-80 GPUs for GoogLeNet (ImageNet) with a speedup
of 2.5x over 32 GPUs. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first framework that scales up to 160 GPUs. Furthermore,
even for single node training, S-Caffe shows an improve
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
