

This paper studies the problem of efficiently computing a maximum
independent set from a large graph, a fundamental problem in graph
analysis. Due to the hardness results of computing an exact maximum independent set or an approximate maximum independent set
with accuracy guarantee, the existing algorithms resort to heuristic
techniques for approximately computing a maximum independent
set with good performance in practice but no accuracy guarantee
theoretically. Observing that the existing techniques have various
limits, in this paper, we aim to develop efficient algorithms (with
linear or near-linear time complexity) that can generate a highquality (large-size) independent set from a graph in practice. In particular, firstly we develop a Reducing-Peeling framework which
iteratively reduces the graph size by applying reduction rules on
vertices with very low degrees (Reducing) and temporarily removing the vertex with the highest degree (Peeling) if the reduction
rules cannot be applied. Secondly, based on our framework we design two baseline algorithms, BDOne and BDTwo, by utilizing the
existing reduction rules for handling degree-one and degree-two
vertices, respectively. Both algorithms can generate higher-quality
(larger-size) independent sets than the existing algorithms. Thirdly,
we propose a linear-time algorithm, LinearTime, and a near-linear
time algorithm, NearLinear, by designing new reduction rules and
developing techniques for efficiently and incrementally applying
reduction rules. In practice, LinearTime takes similar time and
space to BDOne but computes a higher quality independent set,
similar in size to that of an independent set generated by BDTwo.
Moreover, in practice NearLinear has a good chance to generate
a maximum independent set and it often generates near-maximum
independent sets. Fourthly, we extend our techniques to accelerate
the existing iterated local search algorithms. Extensive empirical
studies show that all our algorithms output much larger independent sets than the existing linear-time algorithms while having a
similar running time, as well as achieve significant speedup against
the existing iterated local search algorithms.

Graph model has been widely used to represent the relationships
among entities in a wide spectrum of applications such as social
networks, collaboration networks, communication networks and
biological networks. Significant research e↵orts have been devoted
towards many fundamental problems in managing and analysing
graph data. In this paper, we study the problem of efficiently computing an approximate maximum independent set of a graph. A
subset I of vertices in a graph G is an independent set if there is no
edge between any two vertices in I, and its size is measured by the
number of vertices in it. The independent set with the largest size
among all independent sets of G is called the maximum independent set of G, which is not unique. Consider the graph in Figure 1,
{v2 , v5 , v7 , v9 } is an independent set of size 4, while {v1 , v4 , v6 , v8 , v10 }
is a maximum independent set of size 5.
