
Mean-field analysis is an analytical method for understanding large-scale stochastic systems such as large-scale data centers
and communication networks. The idea is to approximate the stationary distribution of a large-scale stochastic system using
the equilibrium point (called the mean-field limit) of a dynamical system (called the mean-field model). This approximation is
often justified by proving the weak convergence of stationary distributions to its mean-field limit. Most existing mean-field
models concerned the light-traffic regime where the load of the system, denote by p, is strictly less than one and is independent
of the size of the system. This is because a traditional mean-field model represents the limit of the corresponding stochastic
system. Therefore, the load of the mean-field model is p = limy_4o. p\%), where p) is the load of the stochastic system of
size N. Now if p(N) > 1as N — oo (ie., in the heavy-traffic regime), then p = 1. For most systems, the mean-field limits when
p = 1 are trivial and meaningless. To overcome this difficulty of traditional mean-field models, this paper takes a different
point of view on mean-field models. Instead of regarding a mean-field model as the limiting system of large-scale stochastic
system, it views the equilibrium point of the mean-field model, called a mean-field solution, simply as an approximation
of the stationary distribution of the finite-size system. Therefore both mean-field models and solutions can be functions
of N. This paper first outlines an analytical method to bound the approximation error based on Stein’s method and the
perturbation theory. We further present two examples: the M/M/N queueing system and the supermarket model under the
power-of-two-choices algorithm. For both applications, the method enables us to characterize the system performance under
a broad range of traffic loads. For the supermarket model, this is the first paper that rigorously quantifies the steady-state
performance of the-power-of-two-choices in the heavy-traffic regime. These results in the heavy-traffic regime cannot be
obtained using the traditional mean-field analysis and the interchange of the limits.
