

Comparable Encryption proposed by Furukawa (ESORICS 2013,
CANS 2014) is a variant of order-preserving encryption (OPE) and
order-revealing encryption (ORE); we cannot compare a ciphertext
of v and another ciphertext of v’, but we can compare a ciphertext
of v and a token of b and compare a token of b and another token of
b’. Comparable encryption allows us to implement range and point
queries while keeping the order of v’s as secret as possible.

Recently, Karras, Malhotra, Bhatt, Nikitin, Antyukhov, and Idreos
independently re-define comparable encryption and propose two
schemes, a basic one and an “ambiguous” one, based on linear
algebra (SIGMOD 2016). The basic scheme is just comparable encryption. To hide the order revealed by tokens, they also proposed
an ambiguous scheme where each ciphertext has two interpretations
v and Vdummy- In the context of an indexed database, this means
that every encryption has two places in the database corresponding
to the two interpretations, masking the correct placement in the
database unless the dummy value is detectable. They assessed that
their basic scheme (and ambiguous scheme upon the basic scheme)
is secure against known-plaintext attacks; the adversary will require
O(é) plaintext-ciphertext pairs to recover secret key, where ¢ is a
security parameter.

This paper cryptanalyzes their comparable encryption schemes
by using simple linear algebra. We show that a few tokens and a few
plaintext-ciphertext pairs instead of O(£) pairs allow us to mount
several attacks efficiently. Our attacks are summarized as follows:

e Attacks against the basic scheme:

- A ciphertext-only attack using two tokens orders the
ciphertexts correctly.

- A known-plaintext attack using two tokens and two
plaintexts reveals exact value of v.

e Attacks against the ambiguous scheme:

- A ciphertext-only attack using two tokens orders the
ciphertexts with a constant probability.

- A known-plaintext attack using three tokens and three
plaintexts reveals exact value of v.
