
Maximum coverage and minimum set cover problems—here collec-
tively called coverage problems—have been studied extensively in
streaming models. However, previous research not only achieves
suboptimal approximation factors and space complexities but also
study a restricted set-arrival model which makes an explicit or
implicit assumption on oracle access to the sets, ignoring the com-
plexity of reading and storing the whole set at once. In this paper,
we address the above shortcomings and present algorithms with
improved approximation factor and improved space complexity,
and prove that our results are almost tight. Moreover, unlike most of
the previous work, our results hold in a more general edge-arrival
model.

More specifically, consider an instance with n sets, together
covering m elements. Information arrives in the form of “edges”
from sets to elements (denoting membership) in arbitrary order.

(1) We present (almost) optimal approximation algorithms for
maximum coverage and minimum set cover problems in the
streaming model with an (almost) optimal space complexity
of ˜O(n); i.e., the space is independent of the size of the sets or
the size of the ground set of elements. These results not only
improve the best known algorithms for the set-arrival model,
but also are the first such algorithms for the more powerful
edge-arrival model.

(2) In order to achieve the above results, we introduce a new
general sketching technique for coverage functions: One can
apply this sketching scheme to convert an α-approximation
algorithm for a coverage problem to a (1−ε)α-approximation
algorithm for the same problem in streaming model.
(3) We show the significance of our sketching technique by
ruling out the possibility of solving coverage problems via
accessing (as a black box) a (1±ε)-approximate oracle (e.g., a
sketch function) that estimates the coverage function on any
subfamily of the sets. Finally, we show that our streaming
algorithms achieve an almost optimal space complexity.
