

Leader election is one of the basic problems in distributed computing. This is a symmetry breaking problem: all nodes of a network
must agree on a single node, called the leader. If the nodes of the
network have distinct labels, then such an agreement means that all
nodes have to output the label of the elected leader. For anonymous
networks, the task of leader election is formulated as follows: every
node v of the network must output a simple path, which is coded
as a sequence of port numbers, such that all these paths end at
a common node, the leader. In this paper, we study deterministic
leader election in arbitrary anonymous networks.

It is well known that deterministic leader election is impossible
in some networks, regardless of the allocated amount of time, even
if nodes know the map of the network. This is due to possible
symmetries in it. However, even in networks in which it is possible
to elect a leader knowing the map, the task may be still impossible
without any knowledge, regardless of the allocated time. On the
other hand, for any network in which leader election is possible
knowing the map, there is a minimum time, called the election
index, in which this can be done. Informally, the election index of
a network is the minimum depth at which views of all nodes are
distinct. Our aim is to establish tradeoffs between the allocated
time t and the amount of information that has to be given a priori
to the nodes to enable leader election in time r in all networks
for which leader election in this time is at all possible. Following
the framework of algorithms with advice, this information (a single
binary string) is provided to all nodes at the start by an oracle
knowing the entire network. The length of this string is called the
size of advice. For a given time 7 allocated to leader election, we give
upper and lower bounds on the minimum size of advice sufficient
to perform leader election in time t.

We focus on the two sides of the time spectrum. For the smallest
possible time, which is the election index of the network, we show


that the minimum size of advice is linear in the size n of the network,
up to polylogarithmic factors. On the other hand, we consider
large values of time: larger than the diameter D by a summand,
respectively, linear, polynomial, and exponential in the election
index; for these values, we prove tight bounds on the minimum
size of advice, up to multiplicative constants. We also show that
constant advice is not sufficient for leader election in all graphs,
regardless of the allocated time.
