

A common approach for designing scalable algorithms for massive data sets is to distribute the computation across, say k, machines and process the data using limited communication between
them. A particularly appealing framework here is the simultaneous
communication model whereby each machine constructs a small
representative summary of its own data and one obtains an approximate/exact solution from the union of the representative summaries.
If the representative summaries needed for a problem are small,
then this results in a communication-efficient and round-optimal (requiring essentially no interaction between the machines) protocol.
Some well-known examples of techniques for creating summaries
include sampling, linear sketching, and composable coresets. These
techniques have been successfully used to design communication
efficient solutions for many fundamental graph problems. However,
two prominent problems are notably absent from the list of successes, namely, the maximum maiching problem and the minimum
vertex cover problem. Indeed, it was shown recently that for both
these problems, even achieving a modest approximation factor of
polylog(n) requires using representative summaries of size Q(n?)
ie. essentially no better summary exists than each machine simply
sending its entire input graph.

The main insight of our work is that the intractability of matching and vertex cover in the simultaneous communication model is
inherently connected to an adversarial partitioning of the underlying graph across machines. We show that when the underlying
graph is randomly partitioned across machines, both these problems admit randomized composable coresets of size O(n) that yield an
O(1)-approximate solution’, In other words, a small subgraph of the
input graph at each machine can be identified as its representative
summary and the final answer then is obtained by simply running
any maximum matching or minimum vertex cover algorithm on
these combined subgraphs. This results in an O(1)-approximation
