Call for Contributions

ASPLOS is the premier forum for multidisciplinary systems research spanning computer architecture and hardware, programming languages and compilers, operating systems and networking, as well as applications and user interfaces. The 2017 conference will be held in Xi'an, China. Xi'an is a modern city with 7000 years history, and was the capital of China for 1100 years, having held the position under several of the most important dynasties in Chinese history, including Zhou, Qin, Han, Sui, and Tang. Xi'an is the starting point of the Silk Road and home to the Terracotta Army of Emperor Qin Shi Huang. 

Like its predecessors, ASPLOS 2017 invites papers on ground-breaking research at the intersection of at least two ASPLOS disciplines: architecture, programming languages, operating systems, and related areas. Non-traditional topics are especially encouraged. The importance of cross-cutting research continues to grow as we grapple with the end of Dennard scaling, the explosion of big data, scales ranging from ultra-low power wearable devices to exascale parallel and cloud computers, the need for sustainability, and increasingly human-centered applications. ASPLOS embraces systems research that directly targets these new problems in innovative ways. The research may target diverse goals such as performance, energy and thermal efficiency, resiliency, security, and sustainability. The review process will be sensitive to the challenges of multidisciplinary work in emerging areas. 

Areas of interest include, but are not limited to: 
emerging platforms at all scales, from embedded to cloud
heterogeneous multicore architectures and accelerators
systems for enabling parallelism at an extreme scale
non-traditional computing systems
systems that address social, educational, and environmental challenges.
programming models and compilation for existing and emerging platforms
managing, storing, and computing on big data
virtualization
memory and storage technologies and architectures
power, energy, and thermal management
security, reliability, and availability
verification and testing, and their impact on design

Call for Papers

Abstracts: Aug 8, 2016
Full Paper Submissions: Aug 15, 2016 
Notification: Nov 10, 2016
Final Copy Deadline: Jan 27, 2017

The Call For Papers (PDF Version) can be found here


Submission Site

Please follow this link to submit your paper. 
