USENIX ATC '17 Call for Papers

Important Dates
Paper submissions due: Tuesday, February 7, 2017, 11:59 p.m. GMT
Notification to authors: Friday, April 21, 2017, 2:00 p.m. PDT
Final paper files due: Wednesday, May 31, 2017
Download Call for Papers PDF

Conference Organizers
Program Co-Chairs
Dilma Da Silva, Texas A&M University
Bryan Ford, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
Program Committee
Rachit Agarwal, Cornell University
Nadav Amit, VMware Research Group
Mona Attariyan, Google
Sorav Bansal, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
Adam Bates, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Justin Cappos, New York University Tandon School of Engineering
Rong Chen, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Mihai Christodorescu, Qualcomm Research
Charlie Curtsinger, Grinnell College
Christina Delimitrou, Cornell University
Fred Douglis, Dell EMC
Eric Eide, University of Utah
Ittay Eyal, Cornell University
Ada Gavrilovska, Georgia Institute of Technology
Vishakha Gupta, Intel Labs
Michio Honda, NEC Laboratories Europe
Yu Hua, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Peng (Ryan) Huang, Microsoft Research and Johns Hopkins University
Taesoo Kim, Georgia Institute of Technology
Eddie Kohler, Harvard University
Jean-Pierre Lozi, Université Nice Sophia Antipolis
Gilles Muller, Inria
Donald E. Porter, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and Fortanix
Christopher J. Rossbach, The University of Texas at Austin and VMware Research Group
Ji-Yong Shin, Yale University
Liuba Shrira, Brandeis University
Nisha Talagala, Parallel Machines
Chunqiang Tang, Facebook
Theodore Ts'o, Google
Dan Tsafrir, Technion—Israel Institute of Technology
Dan Williams, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center
David Wolinsky, Facebook
Timothy Wood, George Washington University
Overview
Authors are invited to submit original and innovative papers to the Refereed Papers Track of the 2017 USENIX Annual Technical Conference. We seek high-quality submissions that further the knowledge and under­standing of modern computing systems with an emphasis on implementations and experimental results. We encourage papers that break new ground, present insightful results based on practical experience with computer systems, or are important, independent reproductions/refutations of the experimental results of prior work. USENIX ATC '17 has a broad scope, and specific topics of interest include (but are not limited to):

Architectural interaction
Big data infrastructure
Cloud computing
Datacenter networking
Deployment experience
Distributed and parallel systems
Embedded systems
Energy/power management
File and storage systems
Mobile and wireless
Networking and network services
Operating systems
Reliability, availability, and scalability
Security, privacy, and trust
System and network management and troubleshooting
Usage studies and workload characterization
Virtualization
USENIX ATC '17 is especially interested in papers broadly focusing on practical techniques for building better software systems: ideas or approaches that provide practical solutions to significant issues facing practitioners. This includes all aspects of system development: techniques for developing systems software; analyzing programs and finding bugs; making systems more efficient, secure, and reliable; and deploying systems and auditing their security.

Experience reports and operations-oriented studies, as well as other work that studies software artifacts, introduces new data sets of practical interest, or impacts the implementation of software components in areas of active interest to the community are well-suited for the conference.

The conference seeks both long-format papers consisting of 11 pages and short-format papers of 5 pages, including footnotes, appendices, figures, and tables, but not including references. Short papers will be included in the proceedings and will be presented as normal but in sessions with slightly shorter time limits.
Best Paper Awards
Cash prizes will be awarded to the best papers at the conference. Please see the USENIX proceedings library for Best Paper winners from previous years.

Best of the Rest Track
The USENIX Annual Technical Conference is the senior USENIX forum covering the full range of technical research in systems software. Over the past two decades, USENIX has added a range of more specialized conferences. ATC is proud of the content being published by its sibling USENIX conferences and will be bringing a track of encore presentations to ATC '17. This "Best of the Rest" track will allow attendees to sample the full range of systems software research in one forum, offering both novel ATC presentations and encore presentations from recent offerings of ATC's sibling conferences.

What to Submit   Submit Your Work
Authors are required to submit full papers by the paper submission deadline. It is a hard deadline; no extensions will be given. All submissions for USENIX ATC '17 will be electronic, in PDF format, via the Web submission form. Do not email submissions.

USENIX ATC '17 will accept two types of papers:

Full papers: Submitted papers must be no longer than 11 single-spaced 8.5" x 11" pages, including figures and tables, but not including references. You may include any number of pages for references. Papers should be formatted in 2 columns, using 10-point type on 12-point leading, in a 6.5" x 9" text block. Figures and tables must be large enough to be legible when printed on 8.5" x 11" paper. Color may be used, but the paper should remain readable when printed in monochrome. The first page of the paper should include the paper title and author name(s); reviewing is single blind. Papers longer than 11 pages including appendices, but excluding references, or violating formatting specifications will not be reviewed. In a good paper, the authors will have:
Addressed a significant problem
Devised an interesting and practical solution or provided an important, independent, and experimental reproduction/refutation of prior solutions
Clearly described what they have and have not implemented
Demonstrated the benefits of their solution
Articulated the advances beyond previous work
Drawn appropriate conclusions
Short papers: Authors with a contribution for which a full paper is not appropriate may submit short papers of at most 5 pages, not including references, with the same formatting guidelines as full papers. You may include any number of pages for references. Examples of short paper contributions include:
Original or unconventional ideas at a preliminary stage of development
The presentation of interesting results that do not require a full-length paper, such as negative results or experimental validation
Advocacy of a controversial position or fresh approach
For more details on the submission process and for templates to use with LaTeX and Word, authors should consult the detailed submission requirements. Specific questions about submissions may be sent to atc17chairs@usenix.org.

By default, all papers will be made available online to registered attendees before the conference. If your accepted paper should not be published prior to the event, please notify production@usenix.org. In any case, the papers will be available online to everyone beginning on the first day of the conference, July 12, 2017.

Papers accompanied by nondisclosure agreement forms will not be considered. Accepted submissions will be treated as confidential prior to publication on the USENIX ATC '17 Web site; rejected submissions will be permanently treated as confidential.

Simultaneous submission of the same work to multiple venues, submission of previously published work, or plagiarism constitutes dishonesty or fraud. USENIX, like other scientific and technical con­ferences and journals, prohibits these practices and may take action against authors who have committed them. See the USENIX Conference Submissions Policy for details.

Note that the above does not preclude the submission of a regular full paper that overlaps with a previous short paper or workshop paper. However, any submission that derives from an earlier paper must provide a significant new contribution (for example, by providing a more complete evaluation), and must explicitly mention the contributions of the submission over the earlier paper. If you have questions, contact your program co-chairs atc17chairs@usenix.org, or the USENIX office, submissionspolicy@usenix.org.

Authors will be notified of paper acceptance or rejection by April 21, 2017. Acceptance will typically be conditional, subject to shepherding by a program committee member.

Poster Session
The poster session is an excellent forum to discuss ideas and get useful feedback from the community. Posters and demos for the poster session will be selected from all the full paper and short paper submissions by the poster session chair. If you do not want your submissions to be considered for the poster session, please specify on the submission Web site.

Program and Registration Information
Complete program and registration information will be available in early May on the conference Web site.

HOME
ATTEND
Registration Information
Registration Discounts
Students and Grants
Venue, Hotel, and Travel
PROGRAM
At a Glance
Technical Sessions
ACTIVITIES
Birds-of-a-Feather Sessions
Poster Session
PARTICIPATE
Instructions for Authors and Speakers
Call for Papers
SPONSORSHIP
ABOUT
Organizers
Questions
Help Promote
Past Conferences
USENIX Event Code of Conduct Privacy Statement Conference Policies Contact Us
© USENIX 2017
