Call For Papers
The 17th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing. (IEEE/ACM CCGrid 2017)
Advances in architectures, networks, systems and middleware technologies are leading to new concepts and platforms for computing, ranging from Clusters and Grids to Clouds and Datacenters. The 17th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium in Cluster, Cloud, and Grid Computing (CCGrid 2017) is a forum bringing together international researchers, developers, and practitioners to present leading research activities and results on a broad range of topics related to these concepts, platforms, and their applications. The conference features keynotes, technical presentations, workshops, and posters, as well as the Doctoral Symposium and the SCALE challenge featuring live demonstrations. In 2017, CCGRID will come to Spain, Europe, and will be held in Madrid.
IMPORTANT DATES
Papers due: CLOSED
Author notifications: January 18, 2017
TOPICS OF INTEREST
CCGrid 2017 will have a focus on important and immediate issues that are significantly influencing all aspects of cluster, cloud and grid computing. Topics of interest include, but are not limited to:
Applications and Big Data
Architecture and Networking
Data Centers and CyberInfrastructure
Programming Models and Runtime Systems
Performance Modeling and Evaluation
Scheduling and Resource Management
Mobile and Hybrid Clouds
Storage and I/O
Security, Privacy and Reliability
ORGANIZATION
Honorary Chairs: Mateo Valero, Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Spain
General Chairs: Jesús Carretero (University Carlos III of Madrid, Spain) and Manish Parashar (Rutgers University, USA)
Program Chairs: Franck Cappello, (Argonne National Laboratory and University of Illinois at Urbana, USA), Geoffrey Charles Fox (Indiana University, USA), and Javier Garcia-Blas (University Carlos III of Madrid, Spain).
For more information on the organization, see organization page.
PAPER SUBMISSION GUIDELINES
Authors are invited to submit papers electronically in PDF format. Submitted manuscripts should be structured as technical papers and may not exceed 10 letter-size (8.5 x 11) pages including all figures, tables and references using the IEEE format for conference proceedings.  For the final camera-ready version, authors with accepted papers may purchase up to two additional pages at the following rates: 100 USD for each page. See formatting templates for details:
LaTex Package ZIP
Word Template DOC and PDF
Submissions not conforming to these guidelines may be returned without review. The official language of the conference is English. All manuscripts will be reviewed and judged on technical strength, originality, significance, quality of presentation, and interest and relevance to the conference attendees.
The proceedings will be published through the IEEE Computer Society Conference Publishing Services. Submitted papers must represent original unpublished research that is not currently under review for any other conference or journal. Papers not following these guidelines will be rejected without review and further action may be taken, including (but not limited to) notifications sent to the heads of the institutions of the authors and sponsors of the conference. Submissions received after the due date, exceeding the page limit, or not appropriately structured may not be considered. Authors may contact the conference chairs for more information.
The paper submission online system is https://www.easychair.org/conferences/?conf=ccgrid2017.
PUBLICATION
Proceedings will be published through the IEEE Computer Society Conference Publishing Services.
Paper submitted could be accepted as REGULAR paper (10 pages) or SHORT papers (4 pages), depending on the review scores.
Special Issues:
Distinguished papers selected from the conference, after further extensions, will be recommended for submission and publication in a Special Issue of the journal: Journal of Grid Computing.
CALL FOR TUTORIAL AND WORKSHOP PROPOSALS
For more information on the tutorials and workshops, see the Call for Tutorials and Call for Workshops.
Important News

Conference photos

Early Registration: 
March 1st, 2017
Scale Challenge: 
TCSC $1000 award for winners
Co-Located Event

1 st International Conference on Fog and Edge Computing: Technologies and Applications (ICFEC'2017)
Sponsors

Silver Sponsors


Organized by:

 	
ACM  TCSC IEEE	IEEE
Copyright © 2017 . All Rights Reserved. | Clean Journal by Catch Themes
