The CoNEXT 2017 conference seeks papers presenting significant and novel research results on emerging computer networks and its applications. We especially encourage submissions that present novel experimentation, creative use of networking technologies, and new insights made possible using analysis. We invite submissions on a wide range of topics. The list of topics includes (in alphabetical order):

Big Data platforms with applications to network management, security, measurements
Content distribution and caching, e.g., CDN, peer-to-peer, overlays
Design, analysis, and evaluation of network architectures
Internet measurement and modeling
Innovative uses of network data beyond communication
Networking aspects of datacenters and cloud computing
Networking aspects of operating systems and virtualization architectures
Network control and management, including SDN, NFV and network programmability
Network, transport, and application-layer protocols
Networking aspects of ubiquitous computing, including Internet-of-Things and Smart Cities
Networking aspects of online social networks
Reliability and availability of networks, protocols, and applications
Routing and traffic engineering
Security and privacy aspects of networks, protocols, and applications
Topics at the intersection of energy-efficient computing and networking
Wireless and cellular networks
We are open to other contributions that stretch networking research outside of these topics, present new emerging computing trends, or potentially involve unfamiliar techniques. We ask authors to bear in mind that the main factor of interest for their work will be the implications of their results in networking. Potential authors who are unsure of the scope are encouraged to contact the PC chairs before submission.

Submission
CoNEXT welcomes submission of both long and short papers (2-column, 10pt ACM format). Long papers are the more traditional and complete form to present technical work, and should be no more than 12 pages (and up to 2 additional pages for references). Short papers are the preferred vehicle for contributions whose novelty and impact show the same technical excellence, and whose description fits within 6 pages (with 1 additional page for references). Short papers will be reviewed with a more open mind towards the scope of evaluation or breadth of topics compared to long papers. Note that position papers, critiques of networking research, and ideas that are not yet fully complete or evaluated are a better fit for the HotNets workshop. We recommend that authors check both CFPs before submitting.

AUTHORS TAKE NOTE: The official publication date is the date the proceedings are made available in the ACM Digital Library. This date may be up to two weeks prior to the first day of your conference. The official publication date affects the deadline for any patent filings related to published work.

Contact us
If you have any questions please email the TPC co-chairs: conext17chairs@gmail.com
Download CFP
Paper Submission
Important Dates
 Abstract Registration

June 12, 2017 (23:59 PDT)

 Paper Submission

June 19, 2017 (23:59 PDT)
(hard deadline, no extensions will be given)

 Notification of Acceptance

September 10, 2017

 Camera Ready

October 16, 2017

 Official Publication

December 1, 2017

 Conference

December 12-15, 2017

