Call for papers 
The European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys) is a premier international forum for presenting computer systems research, broadly construed. EuroSys 2017 seeks papers on all areas of computer systems research, including:

Cloud computing and datacenter systems
Database systems and data analytics frameworks
Operating systems
Virtualization and virtualized systems
File and storage systems
Distributed systems
Mobile and pervasive systems
Networked systems
Dependable systems
Language support and runtime systems
Parallelism, concurrency, and multicore systems
Real-time, embedded, and cyber-physical systems
Secure systems, privacy, and anonymity-preserving systems
Tracing, analysis, and transformation of systems
We encourage papers that span different topics and communities. We also welcome experience papers that clearly articulate lessons learned and papers that refute prior published results. Papers will be judged on novelty, significance, correctness, and clarity. Preference will be given to papers with innovative ideas and new approaches over papers with incremental results on well-established problems. Papers will be provisionally accepted and final acceptance will be subject to shepherding by a member of the program committee.

Reviewing will be double-blind, meaning the authors’ identities will be hidden from the reviewers. EuroSys applies ACM’s policies for plagiarism, submission confidentiality, reviewer anonymity, and prior and concurrent paper submission.

Important dates
Abstract Submission	October 14, 2016
Full paper Submission	October 21, 2016
Notification to authors	January 23, 2017
Submission information
The deadline for submitting the final version of the papers is Friday, October 21st, 23:59 CEST (Zürich time). There will be no extensions.

Submissions should be made online at https://eusys17.ethz.ch/. Submissions should be no longer than 12 pages including all content, except references. Papers must be formatted using 10pt font, single spacing (minimum 11pt spacing between lines), two columns with 0.33 inches between columns, and a text box of 7 by 9 inches. Please ensure that the pages are numbered. Authors should use this version of the SIGPLAN template, which has been modified to use 10pt font, and specify the “preprint” option to achieve the required formatting. Reviewing will be double-blind, so papers must not identify the authors. In place of the authors’ names, please indicate the paper ID number assigned when registering the paper, along with the total number of pages in the submission. When referring to your own previous work, you should use the third person. Papers that violate the submission guidelines will be rejected regardless of their merit. Accepted papers will be allowed 14 pages in the proceedings, plus references. Authors who have questions about their submission can contact the PC co-chairs at eusys17@inf.ethz.ch.

In addition to paper presentations, EuroSys 2017 will have a poster session. Submissions for posters will open closer to the conference deadline. Accepted papers will automatically qualify for the poster session, and authors will be strongly encouraged to participate.
