CALL FOR PAPERS
Euro-Par is the prime European conference covering all aspects of parallel and distributed processing, ranging from theory to practice, from small to the largest parallel and distributed systems and infrastructures, from fundamental computational problems to full-fledged applications, from architecture, compiler, language and interface design and implementation, to tools, support infrastructures, and application performance aspects. Euro-Par’s unique organization into topics provides an excellent forum for focused technical discussion, as well as interaction with a large, broad and diverse audience.
Scope

We invite submissions of high-quality, novel and original research results in areas of parallel and distributed computing covered by the following topics:
Support Tools and Environments
Performance and Power Modeling, Prediction and Evaluation
Scheduling and Load Balancing
High Performance Architectures and Compilers
Parallel and Distributed Data Management and Analytics
Cluster and Cloud Computing
Distributed Systems and Algorithms
Parallel and Distributed Programming, Interfaces, and Languages
Multicore and Manycore Parallelism
Theory and Algorithms for Parallel Computation and Networking
Parallel Numerical Methods and Applications
Accelerator Computing
The conference will feature contributed and invited talks. Co-located workshops are also planned. See also the Paper Submission section.

Instructions to submit camera-ready papers

The page limit for the original submission was 12 pages. If you need to substantially extend your article to take into account reviews, you may use one or two extra pages without any cost (14 pages is a hard limit).
Please sign by hand and include in your submission a scanned copy of the LNCS copyright agreement for the publication in the conference proceedings (Conference title: Euro-Par 2017, Editors : Rivera et al.). One author may sign on behalf of all the authors of a particular paper, provided that permission to do so has been accorded by the others author in advance. Digital signatures are not allowed.
Please remember that all source files (LaTeX file, figures, and references as bbl file), the PDF of the camera-ready version of your paper, and the signed copyright form must be included in a compressed archive (zip, gzip, tgz).
The LNCS style file, which can be downloaded from the Springer Web site, must be strictly followed, as all source files will be manually reviewed and any spacing modification (vspaces, margins, etc.) to the style file will be removed. Papers not strictly adhering the style will not be considered for publication in the conference proceedings.
Remember that at least one author should register (regular registration) to the conference to have your paper published. The author registration should be done by May 27th.
