HotCloud '17 Call for Papers

Sponsored by USENIX, the Advanced Computing Systems Association
HotCloud ’17 will be co-located with the USENIX ATC '17, July 12–14, 2017.

Important Dates
Paper submissions due: Tuesday, March 14, 2017, 11:59 pm PDT
Notification to authors: Tuesday, April 18, 2017
Final paper files due: Tuesday, May 16, 2017
Download Call for Papers PDF

Workshop Organizers
Program Co-Chairs
Eyal de Lara, University of Toronto
Swaminathan Sundararaman, Parallel Machines
Program Committee
Ganesh Ananthanarayanan, Microsoft
Victor Bahl, Microsoft
Hitesh Ballani, Microsoft
Muli Ben-Yehuda, Technion—Israel Institute of Technology
Theo Benson, Duke University
Nilton Bila, IBM Research
Andres Lagar Cavilla, Google
Stephen J. Fink, IBM Research
Irene Finocci, Sapienza University of Rome
Peter Fischer, University of Freiburg
Sindhu Ghanta, Parallel Machines
Sharon Goldberg, Boston University
Haryadi Gunawi, University of Chicago
Kaustubh Joshi, AT&T Research
Rama Kotla, Amazon
Michael Kozuch, Intel Labs
Purushottam (Puru) Kulkarni, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay
Ethan Miller, University of California, Santa Cruz
Scott Rixner, Rice University
Lalith Suresh, VMware Research
Nesime Tatbul, Intel Labs and Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Bhuvan Urgaonkar, The Pennsylvania State University
Bernard Wong, University of Waterloo
Henry Xu, City University of Hong Kong
Steering Committee
John Arrasjid, Dell EMC
Dilma Da Silva, Texas A&M University
Fred Douglis, Dell EMC
Casey Henderson, USENIX Association
Hakim Weatherspoon, Cornell University
John Wilkes, Google
Dongyan Xu, Purdue University
USENIX Liaison
Irfan Ahmad, CachePhysics
Overview
HotCloud brings together researchers and practitioners from academia and industry working on cloud computing technologies to share their perspectives, report on recent developments, discuss research in progress, and identify new/emerging "hot" trends in this important area. While cloud computing has gained traction over the past few years, many challenges remain in the design, implementation, and deployment of cloud computing.

HotCloud is open to examining all models of cloud computing, including the scalable management of in-house servers, remotely hosted Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS), infrastructure augmented with tools and services that provide Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS), and Software-as-a-Service (SaaS).

We solicit original papers on a wide range of cloud computing topics for HotCloud. We particularly encourage the submission of position papers that describe novel research directions and work that is in its formative stages. Interesting issues show up at all levels of the software stack, but HotCloud’s emphasis is on combining mechanisms to build working clouds rather than on implementing new low-level mechanisms themselves. For example, papers on using virtual machines in new ways would be preferred over papers on improving core VM technology.

The HotCloud '17 program committee is placing a strong emphasis on encouraging early-stage ideas. As a workshop, our key role is to provide a place where novel ideas at their nascent stages can see the light of day long before they are ready for publication at the various "conferences of record." Hence, we will be looking for papers that generate discussion and debate. A good way to think about this is that if you are only a few months away from submitting to SOCC, VLDB, OSDI, SOSP, FAST, etc., you are probably already past the sweet spot for HotCloud.

Topics
Topics of interest include but are not limited to the following:

Improving elasticity and availability in cloud infrastructure and cloud services
Cloud support for new hardware technologies (e.g. accelerators and GPUs)
Cloud data management and analytics
Multi-tenancy and related issues such as performance isolation
Micro-cloud (or Cloudlet) infrastructure
Charging models and economics
Power-efficient (“green") computing for clouds
Monitoring, troubleshooting, and failure recovery
Debugging and performance analysis of cloud applications
Cloud management and configuration
Virtual appliance management and composition
Storage architectures for cloud computing
Novel networking approaches for cloud computing
Programming models
Security and privacy in clouds
New applications for clouds
Mobility
Integrating enterprise applications with the cloud
Cloud operations
Cloud workload management including migration to disparate clouds
Submission Instructions   Submit Your Work
Please submit your papers (no extended abstracts) in PDF format via the Web form. Do not email submissions.

The complete submission must be no longer than five (5) pages not including references and discussion topic section (see below). It should be typeset in two-column format in 10-point type on 12-point (single-spaced) leading, with the text block being no more than 6.5" wide by 9" deep. Submissions that violate any of these restrictions may not be reviewed. The limits will be interpreted fairly strictly, and no extensions will be given for reformatting. If you wish, you may use this LaTeX template and style file.

Discussion Topics section: In keeping with the workshop format described above, authors of each full paper are required to add a section, immediately before references, no longer than a half a page (i.e., a single (1) column) that explicitly calls out what kind of feedback you are looking to receive, the controversial points of the paper, the type of discussion this paper is likely to generate in a workshop format, the open issues the paper does not address, and under what circumstances the whole idea might fall apart.

There are no formal restrictions on the use of color in graphs or charts, but please use them sparingly—not everybody has access to a color printer.

The names of authors and their affiliations should be included on the first page of the submission.

Simultaneous submission of the same work to multiple venues, submission of previously published work, or plagiarism constitutes dishonesty or fraud. USENIX, like other scientific and technical conferences and journals, prohibits these practices and may take action against authors who have committed them. See the USENIX Conference Submissions Policy for details. Papers accompanied by nondisclosure agreement forms will not be considered. If you are uncertain whether your submission meets USENIX's guidelines, please contact the program co-chairs, hotcloud17chairs@usenix.org, or the USENIX office, submissionspolicy@usenix.org.

Reviewing of papers will be done by the program committee, potentially assisted by outside referees in limited cases. Accepted papers may be shepherded through an editorial review process by a member of the program committee. All papers will be available online to registered attendees before the workshop. If your accepted paper should not be published prior to the event, please notify production@usenix.org. The papers will be available online to everyone beginning on the first day of the workshop. Accepted submissions will be treated as confidential prior to publication on the USENIX Web site; rejected submissions will be permanently treated as confidential.

By submitting a paper, you agree that at least one of the authors will attend the workshop to present it. If the workshop registration will pose a hardship for the presenter of the accepted paper, please contact conference@usenix.org.
