Hot Interconnects is the premier international forum for researchers and developers of state-of-the-art hardware and software architectures and implementations for interconnection networks of all scales, ranging from multi-core on-chip interconnects to those within systems, clusters, datacenters and Clouds. This yearly conference is attended by leaders in industry and academia. The atmosphere provides for a wealth of opportunities to interact with individuals at the forefront of this field.

Themes include cross-cutting issues spanning computer systems, networking technologies, and communication protocols for high-performance interconnection networks. This conference is directed particularly at new and exciting technology and product innovations in these areas. Contributions should focus on real experimental systems, prototypes, or leading-edge products and their performance evaluation. In addition to those subscribing to the main theme of the conference, contributions are also solicited in the topics listed below.

Building on last year's successful technical program, keynotes, sessions, and panels on datacenter networking and their requirements, and solutions, in 2017 Hot Interconnects moves to Ericsson, Santa Clara, CA for the conference. This year's conference focuses on data-center, virtualized, and cloud networking. We hope you can join us there.


Download the call for papers as pdf or txt. 
Themes

Novel and innovative interconnect architectures
Multi-core processor interconnects
System-on-Chip Interconnects
Advanced chip-to-chip communication technologies
Optical interconnects
Protocols and interfaces for inter-processor communication
Survivability and fault-tolerance of interconnects
High-speed packet processing engines and network processors
System and storage area network architectures and protocols
High-performance host-network interface architectures
High-bandwidth and low-latency I/O
Pb/s switching and routing technologies
Innovative architectures for supporting collective communication
Novel communication architectures to support cloud computing
Centralized and distributed cloud interconnects
Requirements driving high-performance interconnects
Traffic characterization for HPC systems and commercial datacenters
Software for Network/Fabric Bring-up, Configuration and Performance
Management, e.g., OpenFlow or OpenSM
Data Center networking
Submission Guidelines

Paper abstract deadline (extended): May 12, 2017 11:59PM AOE
Paper submission deadline (extended): May 19, 2017 11:59PM AOE
Notification of acceptance: June 23, 2017

Papers need sufficient technical detail to judge quality and suitability for presentation
Paper limit: 8 pages, 2 columns
Submit title, author, abstract, and full paper (8 pages, double-column, IEEE format)
Papers should be submitted electronically through EasyChair and should be in accordance to the formatting instructions here
Paper format
We invite papers to be submitted either as regular, long papers (6-8 pages) or as short papers (3-4 pages). Short papers could be positional papers, industry papers, or papers describing hot-off-the-press breaking research results, and will judged accordingly and independently from the regular papers.

You can find author's final paper formatting and submission instructions here.

Publication & Presentation

Papers accepted s will be included in proceedings by the IEEE and appear on IEEE Xplore. Papers accepted will be presented at the HotI symposium.

Awards

An award will be given to the Best Student Paper. To be eligible for the Best Student Paper award the first (and main) author(s) must be a full-time student(s) at the time of submission. This year HotI will provide Student Travel Awards to eligible applicant students. Information on application for the travel awards can be found here

About the conference

Conference held on August 29-30 2017, Santa Clara, CA
Papers selected will be published in proceedings by the IEEE Computer Society
Presentations are 30-minute talks in a single-track format
