Important Dates

Paper submissions due (no extensions):	Wednesday	January 25, 2017	11:59 p.m. GMT/UTC
Notification to authors	Friday	April 7, 2017	
Revised papers due	Friday	April 28, 2017	
Workshop date		May 7 -- 10, 2017	
Workshop Organizers

General Chairs	
Rachit Agarwal	Cornell University
Ivan Beschastnikh	University of British Columbia (UBC)
Program Chairs	
Alexandra Fedorova	University of British Columbia (UBC)
Andrew Warfield	University of British Columbia (UBC)
Program Committee	
Peter Druschel	Max Planck Institute
Roxana Geambasu	Columbia University
Michael Kaminsky	Intel Labs
Kim Keeton	Hewlett Packard Labs
Derek Murray	Google
Don Porter	University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Christopher Rossbach	UT Austin and VMware Research
Margo Seltzer	Harvard University and Oracle Labs
Michael Stumm	University of Toronto
Steering Committee	
George Candea	EPFL
Petros Maniatis	Google
Robbert van Renesse	Cornell University
Margo Seltzer	Harvard University and Oracle Labs
Phillip Stanley-Marbell	MIT
Shan Lu	University of Chicago
Overview

The 16th Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems will bring together researchers and practitioners in computer systems, broadly construed. Continuing the HotOS tradition, participants will present and discuss new ideas in systems research and how technological advances and new applications are shaping our computational infrastructure.

Computing systems encompass both traditional platforms—smartphones, desktops, and datacenters—and new technologies, like implantable embedded devices, geographically distributed stream processing systems, and autonomous vehicle control. In this context, a deluge of personal, corporate, sensitive, ephemeral, or historical information being produced, transmitted, processed, and stored poses interesting systems challenges. Systems are expected to guard this information, and do so better, faster, and using less energy.

We solicit position papers that propose new directions of systems research, advocate innovative approaches to long-standing systems problems, or report on deep insights gained from experience with real-world systems. HotOS areas of interest include operating systems, storage, networking, distributed systems, programming languages, security, dependability, and manageability. We are also interested in systems contributions influenced by other fields such as hardware design, machine learning, control theory, networking, economics, social organization, and biological or other nontraditional computing systems.

To ensure a vigorous workshop, attendance is by invitation only. Authors will be invited based on their submission’s originality, topical relevance, technical merit, and likelihood of leading to insightful technical discussions that will influence future systems research. We will heavily favor submissions that are radical, forward-looking, and open-ended, as opposed to mature work on the verge of conference publication.

Paper Submission Instructions

Position papers must be received by the paper submission deadline mentioned above. This is a hard deadline, and no extensions will be granted.

Submissions must be no longer than 5 pages including figures and tables, plus as many pages as needed for references. Text should be formatted in two columns on 8.5 x 11-inch paper using 10-point Times-Roman font on 12-point (single-spaced) leading, 1-inch margins, and a 0.25-inch gutter (separation between the columns). The title, author names, affiliations, and an abstract should appear on the first page. Pages should be numbered. Figures and tables should not require magnification for viewing; they may contain color, but should be legible when printed or displayed in black and white. Submissions not meeting these criteria will be rejected without review, and no deadline extensions will be granted for reformatting. Papers should be submitted as PDF files via the web submission form.

Revised versions of all accepted papers will be available online to registered attendees before the workshop. After the workshop, accepted papers will be made available on the workshop site, along with slides of the presentation, and a summary of the discussion at the workshop. Simultaneous submission of the same work to multiple venues, submission of previously published work, or plagiarism constitutes dishonesty or fraud. ACM, like other scientific and technical conferences and journals, prohibits these practices and may take action against authors who have committee them. See the ACM plagiarism policy and procedures for details.

Questions? Contact the program chairs.

© SIGOPS 2017

