CALL FOR PAPERS

Download PDF
Introduction
The 2017 IEEE International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications (HPCC) is the 19th edition of a highly successful forum of discussion for engineers and scientists in academia, industry, and the government. The forum provides a venue to discuss profound challenges and to present and discuss new ideas, research results, applications, and experience on all aspects of high performance computing and communications.

Important Dates:
Paper submission deadline: June 15th, 2017 
Extended: July 1st 2017 (midnight) (AOE) 
Main conference decision notification: August 15th, 2017
Main conference camera-ready deadline: September 15th, 2017
Conference: December 18-20, 2017
Scope and Topics
We are soliciting paper submissions in the following topic areas:

Parallel and distributed system architectures
Languages and compilers for high performance computing
Parallel and distributed software technologies
Parallel and distributed algorithms
Resource management for parallel and distributed systems
Embedded systems
Peer-to-peer computing
Grid and cluster computing
Web services and Internet computing
Cloud computing
Utility computing
Performance evaluation and measurement
Tools and environments for software development
Distributed systems and applications
High-performance scientific and engineering computing
Database applications and data mining
Biological/molecular computing
Bioinformatics
Collaborative and cooperative environments
Mobile computing and wireless communications
Computer Networks
Telecommunications
Pervasive/ubiquitous computing and intelligence
Autonomic computing, reliability, and fault-tolerance
Trust, security, and privacy
Energy-aware computing
Submission Guidelines
Submissions must include an abstract, keywords, and the e-mail address of the corresponding author. The submission may not exceed 8 pages for main conference, including tables and figures, in IEEE CS format.  The template files for LATEX or WORD can be downloaded from http://www.ieee.org/conferences_events/conferences/publishing/templates.html.  All paper submissions must represent original and unpublished work. Each submission will be peer reviewed by at least three program committee members. The authors commit that if the submission is accepted, at least one of the authors will register for the conference and present the work.

Submit your paper(s) in PDF file at the submission site: https://easychair.org/conferences/?conf=hpcc17

*The submission is NOT double blind, i.e., you can include your name on the submission

Publications
Accepted and presented papers will be included in the IEEE Conference Proceedings published by IEEE CS CPS (EI Index), which will be uploaded to IEEE Xplorer.  At least one of the authors of an accepted paper must have full registration and present the work at the conference, otherwise the paper may be removed from the digital libraries of IEEE CS after the conference.

 

 
