Call for Papers
ICPP 2017 will be organized around the following tracks:

Architecture, including processor; memory; I/O; network; instruction-, thread- and data-level parallelism; accelerators & other special-purpose hardware; power-aware/energy-efficient; performance
Algorithms, including combinatorial and numerical; scheduling; power- aware/energy-efficient; machine learning; modeling & analysis; scalability
Applications, including big data; data analytics; computational science & engineering (e.g., aerospace, arts; biology, finance, geology); scalability
Software, including systems software; middleware; programming models, languages, and environments; compilers; operating systems; run-time systems; resource management; performance modeling and evaluation
Download CFP [pdf]
Important Dates
Submission deadline: 27 February 2017 15 March 2017 (11:59:59 PM AoE)
Author notification: 8 May 2017
Camera-ready paper due: 23 June 2017
Registration deadline: 30 June 2017
Authors of accepted papers are requested to submit their papers by following the instructions at the appropriate link below:
Camera-ready submission for the main conference
Camera-ready submission for workshops
Paper Submission Guidelines
Paper submissions should be formatted according to the IEEE standard double-column format with a font size of 10 pt or larger and a maximum of 10 letter-size (8.5" x 11") pages. Submissions should represent original research results and may not already be under review or accepted for publication in another venue. Papers should be submitted to EasyChair - ICPP 2017.

Proceedings & Policies
Proceedings of the conference and workshops will be available at the conference and will be submitted to IEEE Xplore and CSDL and submitted for EI indexing

Invitation Letters for Visa Applications

Invitation letters will only be issued to attendees who have registered and can travel to the United Kingdom.
Attendees will need to check locally (for their country of origin-citizenship) to determine the visa requirements for travel to the United Kingdom and whether they require an invitation letter from the conference.
Information about the Standard Visitor Visa may be found online.
If you require an invitation letter, you will have the opportunity to request one on the first screen during online registration. (Contact the local arrangements chair, Tim Lewis, if you run into any difficulties.)
Author Registration Policy

Your registration will allow you to attend the conference and workshop sessions, the reception, the banquet, and breaks.
Each accepted paper in the main conference and workshops must have a full (non-student) registration associated with an accepted paper. (Authors may purchase up to two additional extra pages at $200/page.)
Authors must register by 30 June 2017 for their papers to appear in the proceedings.
No-show Policy

An accepted paper that is not presented in the conference will be excluded from the final proceedings submitted to IEEE Xplore and CSDL.
Last updated: June 2017 | Contact webmaster
