Call For Papers, ACM IMC 2017, London, UK
The Internet Measurement Conference (IMC) is a highly selective venue for the presentation of measurement-based research in data communications. The focus of IMC 2017 will be on research that either improves the practice of network measurement, or illuminates some facet of an operational network, or both. IMC takes a broad view of contributions that are considered in scope for improving the practice of network measurement, including, but not limited to:

collection and analysis of data that yield new insights about network structure and network performance (e.g., traffic, topology, routing, energy utilization)
collection and analysis of data that yield new insights about application and end-user behavior (e.g., economics, privacy, security, application interaction with protocols)
modeling of network internals and application behavior (e.g., workloads, scaling behavior, assessment of performance bottlenecks)
methods and tools to monitor and visualize network-based phenomena
novel systems and algorithmic techniques that leverage measurement-based findings
advances in data collection, analysis, and storage (e.g., anonymization, querying, sharing)
reappraisal of previous empirical findings
Operational networks of interest include:

the Internet backbone
edge networks (e.g., home networks, cellular networks, WLANs)
data centers and cloud computing infrastructure
software-defined networks and network-function virtualization
peer-to-peer, overlay, and content distribution networks
infrastructure for online social networks
experimental networks, prototype networks, and future Internets
Review process and criteria
IMC 2017 invites two forms of submissions:

Full papers (up to 13 pages for text and figures + unlimited pages for references) that describe original research, with succinctness appropriate to the topics and themes they discuss.
Short papers (up to 6 pages for text and figures + unlimited for references) that convey work that is less mature but shows promise, articulate a high-level vision, describe challenging future directions, critique current measurement wisdom, or offer results that do not merit a full submission.
Any submission exceeding short paper page-length limit will be evaluated as a full paper.

Authors should only submit original work that has not been published before and is not under submission to any other venue. We will consider full paper submissions that extend previously published short, preliminary papers (including IMC short papers) following the model of the ACM SIGCOMM policy.

IMC 2017 will bestow two awards, a best paper award and a community contribution award. The best paper award will recognize the outstanding paper at the conference, and all accepted papers are eligible for it. The community contribution award will recognize a paper with an outstanding contribution to the community in the form of a novel dataset, source code distribution, open platform, or other noteworthy service to the community. To be eligible for the community award, the authors must make their dataset (e.g., through DatCat for Internet measurement data or CRAWDAD for wireless data) or source code (e.g., via github, bitbucket) publicly available, or have an open working platform, etc., by the time of the camera-ready deadline.

A few accepted papers may be forwarded for fast-track submission to IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking.

Ethical Considerations
Papers describing experiments with users or sensitive user data (e.g., network traffic, passwords, social network information), must follow basic precepts of ethical research and subscribe to community norms. These include: respect for privacy, secure storage of sensitive data, voluntary and informed consent if users are placed at risk, avoiding deceptive practices when not essential, beneficence (maximizing the benefits to an individual or to society while minimizing harm to the individual), and risk mitigation. When appropriate, authors are encouraged to include a subsection describing these issues. Authors may want to consult the Menlo Report for further information on ethical principles, or the Allman/Paxson IMC 07 paper for guidance on ethical data sharing.

Note that submitting research for approval by each author’s institutional ethics review body is necessary, but not sufficient – in cases where the PC has concerns about the ethics of the work in a submission, the PC will consider the ethical soundness and justification of any paper, just as it does its technical soundness. The PC takes a broad view of what constitutes an ethical concern, and authors agree to be available at any time during the review process to rapidly respond to queries from the PC chairs regarding ethical considerations. Authors unsure about topical fit or ethical issues are welcome to contact the program committee co-chairs at imc2017pcchairs@sigcomm.org.

IMC 2017 Shadow PC
To provide an educational experience by exposing students to a review process and to subsequently train the next generation of program committee (PC), the ACM IMC 2017 TPC would like to make submitted papers available to the shadow PC. Shadow PCs allow students and others interested in future PC service to read submitted papers and go through the reviewing process, ultimately arriving at a shadow conference program. This opportunity allows future PC members to learn first-hand about the peer-review process and gain experience as a reviewer. The shadow PC process is run on a different system and the shadow PC reviewers will not have any access to the real reviews, the names of the real reviewers, or any other data such as relative rankings. Shadow PC reviewers will have to abide by the same rules and restrictions applicable to regular PC members. This includes, but is not limited to, rules against discussing the papers outside of the PC context, or using in any way results from reviewed papers before such papers have been published. Delegated reviews (i.e., external reviews) are not allowed for the shadow PC. Making a submitted paper available to shadow PC is optional; authors will have the opportunity to opt-in during the paper submission process. Shadow reviews for papers that are reviewed by the shadow PC will be sent out after the actual IMC’17 review process.

Authors who have participated in previous shadow PCs have found the additional reviews helpful; however, these reviews will have no bearing on acceptance to the technical program. You can directly contribute to a successful shadow PC and benefit from the additional feedback on your submission by making your paper available to the shadow PC with no extra overhead. Simply indicate your choice in the HotCrp submission site.

Shadow PC Chairs (contact: imc2017shadowpc@sigcomm.org)

Hamed Haddadi (Queen Mary University of London / Imperial College London)
Ethan Katz-Bassett (USC / Columbia)
Oliver Hohlfeld (RWTH Aachen)
Submission guidelines
All submissions must satisfy the following requirements:

Full papers: up to 13 pages for technical content (including appendices) + unlimited pages for references
Short papers: up to 6 pages for technical content (including appendices) + unlimited pages for references
10-point font for main text; font used in other places (e.g., figures) should be no smaller than 9 point
two-column format, with the size of each column being at most 3.33 x 9.25 inches and the space between columns being at least 0.33 inches letter page size (8.5 x 11 inches)
include names and affiliations of all authors on the title page (no anonymization)
Submissions that do not comply with these requirements will be rejected without review. The sig-alternate-10pt.cls style file satisfies the formatting requirements. Compile your source with options that produce letter page size.

Submission Site
Please submit your paper at https://imc17.hotcrp.com/.

Important Dates
Paper registration (with abstract)	May 11, 2017 (5pm US Pacific Time)
Paper submission	May 18, 2017 (5pm US Pacific Time)
Notification	July 31, 2017
Camera-ready due	September 29, 2017
Conference	November 1-3, 2017
Last modified: Aug 07 2017
