CALL OPEN FOR ISC 2017 RESEARCH PAPERS – SUBMIT BY DEC 2, 2016

2016-09-06 13:08

Frankfurt, September 06, 2016 – Submissions are now open for the ISC 2017 conference Research Paper Sessions, which aim to provide first-class opportunities for engineers and scientists in academia, industry and government to present research that will shape the future of high performance computing. Submissions will be accepted through December 2, 2016.

The Research Paper Sessions will be held from Monday, June 19, through Wednesday, June 21, 2017. ISC High Performance (ISC 2017) will once again be held at Forum Messe Frankfurt.

All accepted research papers will be published in the Springer’s Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS) series. For the camera-ready version, authors are automatically granted one extra page to incorporate reviewer comments. The publication is free of charge and the published papers can be downloaded from Springer’s website for a limited time after the conference. The proceedings are indexed in the ISI Web of Science, EI Engineering Index, ACM Digital Library, dblp, Google Scholar, IO-Port, MathSciNet, Scopus, and Zentralblatt MATH.

Submitted research papers will be reviewed by the ISC 2017 Research Papers Committee, which is headed by Dr. Pavan Balaji of Argonne National Laboratory, with Prof. Dr. David Keyes from KAUST acting as Deputy Chair and Dr. Julian Kunkel from Deutsches Klimarechenzentrum as Proceedings Chair and Dr. Rio Yokota of Tokyo Institute of Technology as Proceedings Deputy Chair.

Awards

The ISC organizers along with the German Gauss Center for Supercomputing will again sponsor the sessions with two awards for outstanding research papers. The Hans Meuer Award and the GAUSS Award details are available here.

Areas of Interest

The Research Papers Committee encourages submission of high-quality papers reporting original work in theoretical, experimental and industrial R&D in these four areas:

Architectures & Networks

Future design concepts of HPC systems
Multicore/manycore systems
Heterogeneous systems
Network technology
Domain-specific architectures
Memory technologies
Trends in HPC processors
Exascale computing
Data, Storage & Visualization

From big data to smart data
Memory systems for HPC & big data
File systems & tape libraries
Data-intensive applications
Databases
Visual analytics
In-situ analytics
Applications & Algorithms

Scalability on future architectures
Performance evaluation & tuning
Innovative domain-specific algorithms
Workflow management
Data analysis & visualization
Coupled simulations
Industrial simulations
Programming Models & Systems Software

The art of parallel programming
Tools and libraries for performance and productivity
Application of methods
Batch job management
Monitoring & administration tools
Production efficiency
Energy efficiency
Note: Submissions on other innovative aspects of high performance computing are also welcome. Submitters will be asked to pick a primary and a second track for their submission.

Please refer to the ISC High Performance website for full submission guidelines.

 

About ISC High Performance

First held in 1986, ISC High Performance is the world’s oldest and Europe’s most important conference and networking event for the HPC community. It offers a strong five-day technical program focusing on HPC technological development and its application in scientific fields, as well as its adoption in commercial environments.

Over 400 hand-picked expert speakers and 150 exhibitors, consisting of leading research centers and vendors, will greet attendees at ISC High Performance.

ISC High Performance is open to engineers, IT specialists, system developers, vendors, scientists, researchers, students, journalists, and other members of the HPC global community. The exhibition attracts decision-makers from automotive, finance, defense, aeronautical, gas & oil, banking, pharmaceutical and other industries, as well those providing hardware, software and services for the HPC community. Attendees will learn firsthand about new products and applications, in addition to the latest technological advances in the HPC industry.

Contact:

Nages Sieslack
Phone +49-621-180686-16
nages.sieslack@isc-group.com
