Call for Papers
The MASCOTS conference encourages original submissions describing state-of-the-art research in the areas of the performance evaluation of computer systems and networks.

Papers describing results of theoretic and/or practical significance are solicited. Experimental, modeling, and simulation studies are all in the scope of the conference. Work presenting novel performance evaluation methods or providing insights on design and runtime management tradeoffs are particularly encouraged.

Broad topics of interest include (but are not limited to):

Big data and machine learning techniques for performance analysis and management
Computer architectures, multi-core processors, and memory systems
Computer networks, protocols, and algorithms
Databases and big data systems and technologies
Distributed and cloud computing
Energy efficient computer systems
Mobile systems
Multimedia systems
Operating systems and virtualization
Security in computer and communication systems
Smart grids and cyber-physical systems
Social networks
Storage and file systems
Web systems, enterprise applications and web services
Wireless, mobile, ad-hoc, and sensor networks
Full Papers:
Submissions must be formatted using two-columns and may be at most 10 pages in length, including all tables, figures, and appendices, but not including references. You may include any number of pages for references. Unsuccessful full paper submissions, where appropriate, will automatically be considered for publication as short papers.

Short Papers:
Authors with a contribution for which a full paper is not appropriate may submit short papers of at most 6 pages, not including references, with the same formatting guidelines as full papers. You may include any number of pages for references. Short papers may describe original or unconventional ideas at a preliminary stage of development, negative results, experimental validations, or original results that do not require a full-length paper.


Further details on formatting instructions and the HotCRP submission link are provided on the Submit page.

Schedule
Abstract submission deadline: April 9, 2017 
Paper submission deadline: April 11, 2017 (***FIRM***) 
Acceptance Notification: June 9, 2017 
Final Camera-ready: July 7, 2017 
Conference: September 20-22, 2017 

