Call for Papers
The International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) is the premier forum for the presentation and discussion of new ideas in microarchitecture, compilers, hardware/software interfaces, and design of advanced computing and communication systems. The goal of MICRO is to bring together researchers in the fields of microarchitecture, compilers, and systems for technical exchange. The MICRO community has enjoyed having close interaction between academic researchers and industrial designers—we aim to continue and strengthen this longstanding tradition at the 50th MICRO in Boston, Massachusetts.

Important Dates
Abstract		March 28th, 2017 at 11:59pm EST
Full Paper		April 4th, 2017 at 11:59pm EST
Rebuttal and Response		June 1st - June 14th 2017
Notification		July 5th 2017
PDF Version

We invite original paper submissions related to (but not limited to) the following topics:

Processor, memory, interconnect, and storage architectures.
Hardware, software, and hybrid techniques for improving system performance, energy-efficiency, cost, complexity, predictability, quality of service, reliability, dependability, security, scalability, programmer productivity, etc.
Architectures for instruction-level, thread-level, and memory-level parallelism: superscalar, VLIW, data-parallel, multithreaded, multicore, manycore, etc.
Compiler and microarchitectural techniques for parallelism (ILP, TLP, MLP).
Low-power, high-performance, and cost/complexity-efficient architectures.
Architectures for emerging platforms, including smartphones, cloud/datacenter, etc.
Architectures and compilers for embedded processors, DSPs, GPUs, ASIPs (network processors, multimedia, wireless, deep learning, neuromorphic, etc.).
Advanced software/hardware speculation and prediction schemes.
Microarchitecture techniques to better support system software, programming languages, programmability, and compilation.
Microarchitecture modeling and simulation methodology.
Insightful experimental and comparative evaluation and analysis of existing microarchitectures, hardware/software mechanisms and workloads.
Copyright © MICRO 2017
