Call for Papers (PDF):

The annual ACM/IFIP/USENIX Middleware conference is a major forum for the discussion of innovations and recent scientific advances of middleware systems with a focus on the design, implementation, deployment, and evaluation of distributed systems, platforms and architectures for computing, storage, and communication. Highlights of the conference will include a high quality single-track technical program, invited speakers, an industrial track, panel discussions involving academic and industry leaders, poster and demonstration presentations, a doctoral symposium, tutorials and workshops.

Important Dates

Abstract Submission	May 12, 2017
Paper Submission	May 19, 2017 11:59:59pm UTC - 12 (Anywhere On Earth)
Notification Due	Aug 23, 2017
Final Version Due	Sep 15, 2017

Topics:

Original submissions of research papers on a diversity of topics are sought, particularly those identifying new research directions. The topics of the conference include, but are not limited to:

Platforms and Usage Models:
Cloud computing and data centres
Data-intensive computing (big data) and data analytics
Mobile devices and services
Ubiquitous and pervasive computing
Networking, network function virtualization, software-defined networking
Internet applications and multimedia
Internet-of-Things, cyber-physical systems, smart cities
Systems and Engineering Issues:
Scalability and performance
Reliability and fault tolerance
Consistency, availability, and replication
Security and privacy
Virtualization, auto-scaling, provisioning, and scheduling
Real-time solutions and quality-of-service
Energy- and power-aware techniques
Design Principles and Programming Support:
Programming abstractions and paradigms for middleware
Methodologies and tools for the design, implementation, verification, and evaluation
Event-based, publish/subscribe, and peer-to-peer solutions
Reconfigurable, adaptable, and reflective approaches
Reviews of middleware paradigms, e.g., object models, aspect orientation, etc.

Original papers of three types are sought:
Research Papers: These papers report original research on the above topics.
Experimentation and Deployment Papers: These papers describe complete systems, platforms, and/or comprehensive experimental evaluations of alternative designs and solutions to well-known problems. The emphasis during the evaluation of these papers will be less on the novelty and more on the demonstrated usefulness and potential impact of the contributions, the extensive experimentation involved, and the quality and weight of the lessons learned.
Big Ideas Papers: These are papers that have the potential for opening up new research directions. For such papers, the potential to motivate new research is more important than full experimental evaluation, though some preliminary evidence of the effectiveness of the approach or idea is important.
Submission Instructions:

Submitted papers must have at most 12 pages of technical content, including text, figures, and appendices, but excluding any number of additional pages for bibliographic references. 

Note that submissions must be double-blind: authors' names must not appear, and authors must make a good faith attempt to anonymize their submissions. 

Experimentation and Deployment papers and Big Ideas papers should clearly indicate their type as part of the title on the first page.
Submitted papers must adhere to the formatting instructions of the ACM SIGPLAN style, which can found on the ACM template page. A sample Latex template using the correct ACM SIGPLAN style can be found here .

All papers should be submitted here: Middleware17 HotCRP 

Each accepted paper should have at least one full (non-student) conference registration. 

The Middleware 2017 conference proceedings will be published in the ACM Digital Library. The official publication date will be the date the proceedings are made available in the ACM Digital Library which may be up to two weeks prior to the first day of the Middleware conference. Note that the official publication date affects the deadline for any patent filings related to published work. 

The Program Committee may, at its discretion, decide to award a Best Student Paper Award and a Best Paper Award to outstanding research contributions. If the primary author of a paper is a student, please identify this in the submission process. 

Open Availability of Datasets and Source Code: Middleware 2017 authors are encouraged to make their system/library implementations publicly available for the community’s wide benefit as open-source software and their experimental data available as open datasets. This is particularly encouraged for "experimentation and deployment papers". 

Please email the PC chairs at mw17-pc-chairs@imperial.ac.uk with any questions.


Program Chairs

Bettina Kemme	McGill University
Peter Pietzuch	Imperial College London
