Call for Papers 

 

Download pdf version from here.
As the premier conference on mobile computing and wireless networking, MobiCom 2017 solicits full papers (limited to 12 pages excluding references) that focus on the system, practice, theory, and challenge of providing users with an enriched and ubiquitous mobile or wireless experience. At its core, we solicit papers that address important challenges in access/communication, energy, systems, security and user experience as it applies to wireless networking and mobile computing. We strongly encourage papers on emerging mobile/wireless topics including but not limited to next generation (5G) mobile networks, internet of things (IoT), machine-to-machine (M2M) communications, novel access paradigms/modalities, smart devices, wearable computing, mobile data science/analysis, communications for embedded and energy harvesting systems, and the mobile web. We also invite papers that integrate mobile/wireless research with innovations in cloud computing and software defined networking.

Successful papers will address real research challenges through rigorous analysis, novel system design, and/or real-world measurement and deployment of mobile networks, systems and applications. The program committee will evaluate each paper using metrics that are appropriate for the topic area. The accepted papers will be published in the conference proceedings. All submissions must describe original research not published or currently under review for another conference or journal.

In addition to regular, full research papers, the conference also invites submission in the following categories:

Experience Papers
The conference invites submission of short papers (limited to 8 pages excluding references) that present extensive experiences with implementation, deployment, and operations of mobile systems and wireless networks. Desirable papers are expected to contain real data as well as descriptions of the practical lessons learned. The experience papers will be evaluated by the MobiCom technical program committee, primarily for (i) the richness of their data or experiences, (ii) inferences drawn or lessons learned, (iii) discovery of new problems, and (iv) their impact on current and future mobile systems and wireless networks as well as on the society. Note that a paper that builds a system and presents a limited experimental evaluation is not suitable as an experience paper. The selected experience papers will be a part of the MobiCom technical program and will be published in the conference proceedings. They should be submitted using the same submission procedure adopted for the full papers. The title of these papers must have the prefix "Experience:".

Challenge Papers
The conference also invites submissions of short papers (limited to 8 pages excluding references) that present revolutionary new ideas or that challenge existing assumptions prevalent among the wireless research community. These "challenge papers" should provide stimulating ideas or visions that may open up exciting avenues and/or influence the direction of future research. Descriptions of new products or evolution of existing work are not appropriate topics for papers in this category. While an exhaustive evaluation of the proposed ideas is not necessary, insight and in-depth understanding of the issues is expected. Challenges papers will be reviewed by the MobiCom technical program committee and will be part of the technical program and published in the MobiCom proceedings. They should be submitted using the same submission procedure adopted for the full papers. The title of these papers must have the prefix "Challenge:".

Verification Papers
Finally, MobiCom welcomes contributions that seek to verify and/or characterize recent breakthrough results in mobile computing using rigorous experimental methodologies with the goal of extensively and thoroughly characterizing the operating parameters under which these results can be reproduced. Such submissions should be short papers (limited to 8 pages excluding references) with "Verification:" as a prefix in the title.

MobiCom strongly encourages authors to describe how they will provide access to well-documented datasets, modeling and/or simulation tools, and codebases to support reproducibility of their methods.


 		 Paper Submission Instructions 		 
All paper submissions will be handled electronically. Authors should prepare a PDF version of their full paper. Any papers that do not adhere to the following guidelines will be immediately rejected:
Full papers - Maximum of 12 pages excluding references (i.e. submissions may include as many additional pages as needed for references)
Experience/Challenge/Verification Papers - Maximum of 8 pages excluding references
Font size no smaller than 10 points
Double column format with each column having dimensions 9.25 inches x 3.33 inches, a space of 0.33 inches between the two columns, and with no more than 55 lines of text per column
Fit properly on US letter-sized paper (8.5 inches x 11 inches)
Authors' names must not appear anywhere in the paper or in the PDF file. The PDF file must also not contain any hyper-links.
All submitted papers would be evaluated through a double-blind reviewing process, with the identities of the authors withheld from the reviewers.

Please direct any questions about the paper submission process to the Program Co-Chairs (at mobicom2017 "dot" tpcchairs "at" gmail "dot" com).

 		Awards		

All accepted regular papers will be considered for the Best Paper Award. The program committee will select a number of candidates for the award among accepted regular papers. The winner will be selected at the conference, taking into consideration both the paper and the presentation.

We will also have an award called the Best Community Paper Award. Among all accepted regular papers, the program committee will select one that contributes the most to the broader research community in terms of real data or new software/hardware or artifacts.

 		Video Presentation		

The authors of each accepted paper will be asked to submit a short 1-minute video to introduce the research presented in their paper to the general public. These videos will be placed on the conference website up to two weeks before the conference, and will be played during the conference. A selected set will be featured by the social media channels related to the conference. A Best Video Award will be given at the conference.
 		 Important Dates 		
Abstracts submission due:	 	5PM EST, March 9, 2017
Paper submissions due:	5PM EDT, March 16, 2017 (Note the switch to daylight savings time on Mar 12 in the US)
Notification of acceptance:	June 8, 2017
Camera-ready due:	July 17, 2017
Video submission due:	Sept 8, 2017
Proceedings publication date:	TBD
 		 Important Notes 		
It is ACM policy (ACM Author Rights and Publishing Policy) not to allow double submissions, where the same paper is submitted to more than one conference/journal concurrently. Any double submissions detected will be immediately rejected from all conferences/journals involved. 
AUTHORS TAKE NOTE: The official publication date is the date the proceedings are made available in the ACM Digital Library. This date may be up to two weeks prior to the first day of your conference. The official publication date affects the deadline for any patent filings related to published work. (For those rare conferences whose proceedings are published in the ACM Digital Library after the conference is over, the official publication date remains the first day of the conference.)
