PODC 2017
Call for Papers

PODC 2017
Call for Papers
The 36th ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing
July 25-27, 2017, Washington, D.C., USA

Paper submission on EasyChair

Printable call for papers

Committees

Program committee
Conference committee
Steering committee
Dates

Deadlines as of May 20, 2017:

Submission: February 15, 2017, 11:59 pm HAST
Acceptance notification: April 26, 2017
Camera ready copy due: May 24, 2017
Scope

The ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing, is an international forum on the theory, design, analysis, implementation and application of distributed systems and networks. We solicit papers in all areas of distributed computing. Papers from all viewpoints, including theory, practice, and experimentation, are welcome. The common goal of the conference is to improve understanding of the principles underlying distributed computing. Topics of interest include, but are not limited to, the following:

distributed algorithms: design, analysis, and complexity
communication networks: algorithms, protocols, applications
multiprocessor and multi-core architectures and algorithms
shared and transactional memory, concurrency, synchronization
fault-tolerance, reliability, self-organization, self-stabilization
Internet applications, social networks, recommendation systems
dynamic, adaptive and machine learning distributed algorithms
distributed operating systems, middleware, databases
biological distributed algorithms
game-theoretic approaches to distributed computing
peer-to-peer systems, overlay networks
high-performance, cluster, cloud and grid computing
wireless networks, mobile computing, autonomous agents
context-aware distributed systems
security in distributed computing, cryptographic protocols
quantum and optics based distributed algorithms
sensor, mesh, and ad hoc networks
specification, semantics, verification of concurrent systems
Submission

Papers are to be submitted electronically, following the guidelines on the conference web page (www.podc.org). Submission must be in English, in pdf format. The papers must be formatted as follows: letter-size paper (8.5×11 inch), single-column, using at least 1 inch margins, 11-point font. Submissions not conforming to these rules as well as the papers outside of the scope of the conference will be rejected without consideration.

A regular paper submission must report on original research that has not been previously or concurrently published; concurrent submissions to journals or conferences are not permitted. A regular submission must begin with a cover page containing: 1) title, with the subtitle “Regular Submission”, 2) author names and affiliations, 3) contact author’s email, address, and telephone number, 4) one paragraph abstract of the paper, 5) indication of whether at least one author is a full-time student and the paper is eligible for best student paper award. The paper must not exceed 10 pages (excluding cover page and references). All of the ideas necessary for an expert to verify fully the central claims in the paper should be included, some of which may be placed in a clearly marked appendix that will be read at the discretion of the program committee. If desired, the authors can simply attach a copy of the full paper as the appendix

A submission for a brief announcement must be at most 3 pages, including title, authors’ names and affiliations, and references. Such submissions may describe work in progress or work presented elsewhere. The title of a brief announcement must begin with the words “Brief Announcement:”.

If requested by the authors on the cover page, a regular submission that is not selected for a regular presentation will be considered for the brief announcement format. This will not affect consideration of the paper for a regular presentation.

Publication

Regular papers of up to 10 pages and brief announcements of up to 3 pages will be included in the conference proceedings. Extended and revised versions of selected papers will be considered for a special issue of the Distributed Computing journal. Two papers will be considered for publication in JACM.

Program

The program will include keynote lectures, regular presentations, and brief announcements.
