	PODS general call for contributions
36th ACM SIGMOD-SIGACT-SIGAI Symposium on PRINCIPLES OF DATABASE SYSTEMS (PODS 2017)
Location and dates to be determined.

The PODS symposium series, held in conjunction with the SIGMOD conference series, provides a premier annual forum for the communication of new advances in the theoretical foundations of data management, traditional or non-traditional (see
https://databasetheory.org/PODS).

 

Accepted papers of PODS 2017

Keynote, PODS tutorial speakers and accepted papers of the 1st submission cycle can be found here.

 

Topics of interest

For the 36th edition, PODS continues to aim to broaden its scope,
and calls for research papers providing original, substantial
contributions along one or more of the following aspects:

deep theoretical exploration of topical areas central to data
management;
new formal frameworks that aim at providing the basis for deeper
theoretical investigation of important emerging issues in data
management; and
validation of theoretical approaches from the lens of practical
applicability in data management. Such papers should, apart from validating
the practical applicability of existing theoretical approach, provide a clear
message to the database theory community as to which aspects need further
(theoretical) investigation, based on the experimental findings.
TOPICS that fit the interests of the symposium include the following:

design, semantics, query languages
databases and knowledge representation
data models, data structures, algorithms for data management
concurrency and recovery, distributed and parallel databases, cloud computing
model theory, logics, algebras, computational complexity
graph databases and (semantic) Web data
data mining, information extraction, search
data streams
database aspects of machine learning
data-centric (business) process management, workflows, web services
incompleteness, inconsistency, uncertainty in data management
data and knowledge integration and exchange, data provenance, views and data warehouses, metadata management
domain-specific databases (multi-media, scientific, spatial, temporal, text)
deductive databases
data privacy and security
 

Organization

Program Chair
Floris Geerts (University of Antwerp, BE)

Program Committee Members
Leopoldo Bertossi (Carleton University, CA)
Meghyn Bienvenu (CNRS, University of Montpellier, FR)
Angela Bonifati (Université de Lyon, FR)
Andrea Calì (University of London, GB)
Rada Chirkova (NC State University, US)
Giuseppe De Giacomo (Sapienza Università di Roma, IT)
Ting Deng (Beihang University, CN)
Diego Figueira (CNRS, FR)
Georg Gottlob (Oxford University, GB)
Paraschos Koutris (University of Wisconsin-Madison, US)
Andrew McGregor (University of Massachusetts, US)
Gerome Miklau (University of Massachusetts, US)
Jeff Phillips (University of Utah, US)
Andreas Pieris (Vienna University of Technology, AT)
Juan L. Reutter (Pontificia Universidad Católica, CH)
Thomas Schwentick (Universitt Dortmund, DE)
Francesco Silvestri (IT University of Copenhagen, DK)
Yufei Tao (Chinese University of Hong Kong, CN)
Stijn Vansummeren (Université Libre de Bruxelles, BE)
Jef Wijsen (Université de Mons, BE)
Qin Zhang (Indiana University Bloomington, US)

PODS General Chair
Jan Van den Bussche (Hasselt University, BE)

PODS Publicity Chair
Paolo Guagliardo (University of Edinburgh, UK)

PODS Proceedings Chair
Emanuel Sallinger (Oxford University, UK)

 

Submission guidelines

Submitted papers must be formatted using the designated style file (sig-alternate-10.cls) which uses 10pt font size and line spacing of 11pt using the “\documentclass{sig-alternate-10}” command in your LaTeX document. Submitted papers should be at most twelve pages, excluding bibliography. Additional details may be included in an appendix, which, however, will be read at the discretion of the PC. Papers that are longer than twelve pages (excluding the appendix) or in font size smaller than 10pt or with line spacing less than 11pt risk rejection without consideration of their merits.

The submission process will be through the Web at https://easychair.org/conferences/?conf=pods2017. Note that, unlike the SIGMOD conference, PODS does not use double-blind reviewing, and therefore PODS submissions should have the names and affiliations of authors listed on the paper.

The results of submitted paper must be unpublished and not submitted elsewhere, including the formal proceedings of other symposia or workshops. Authors of an accepted paper will be expected to sign copyright release forms, and one author is expected to present it at the conference.

 

Important Dates

Dates for first submission cycle:
June 12, 2016, 11:59pm PST: Abstract submission
June 19, 2016, 11:59pm PST: Paper submission
August 28, 2016, 11:59pm PST: Accept/Reject/Revise notification
September 25, 2016, 11:59pm PST: Revision deadline
October 30, 2016, 11:59pm PST: Accept/Reject notification (Revisions)
February 12, 2017: Camera-ready deadline.

Dates for second submission cycle:
December 11, 2016, 11:59pm PST: Abstract submission
December 18, 2016, 11:59pm PST: Paper submission
February 26, 2017, 11:59pm PST: Accept/Reject notification
March 8, 2017: Camera-ready deadline**

 

Awards

Best Paper Award: An award will be given to the best submission, as judged by the program committee.

Best Student Paper Award: There will also be an award for the best submission, as judged by the program committee, written by a student or exclusively by students. An author is considered as a student if at the time of submission, the author is enrolled in a program at a university or institution leading to a doctoral/master’s/bachelor’s degree. The program committee reserves the right to give both awards to the same paper, not to give an award, or to split an award among several papers. Papers authored or co-authored by program committee members are not eligible for an award.

 

Authors take note

The official publication date is the date the proceedings are made available in the ACM Digital Library. This date may be up to two weeks prior to the first day of your conference. The official publication date affects the deadline for any patent filings related to published work. (For those rare conferences whose proceedings are published in the ACM Digital Library after the conference is over, the official publication date remains the first day of the conference.)

 

Download the PODS-2017-CFP-flyer


