Call for Papers
Specific topics of interest include (but are not limited to):

Compilers and runtime systems for parallel and heterogeneous systems
Concurrent data structures
Fault tolerance for parallel systems
Formal analysis and verification
High-performance / scientific computing
Middleware for parallel systems
Parallel algorithms
Parallel applications and frameworks
Parallel programming languages
Parallel programming theory and models
Parallelism in non-scientific workloads including data analytics, cloud computing
Performance analysis, debugging and optimization of parallel programs
Programming tools for parallel and heterogeneous systems
Software engineering for parallel programs
Software productivity for parallel programming
Synchronization and concurrency control
Task-parallel libraries
Papers should report on original research relevant to parallel programming, and should include sufficient background material to make them accessible to the entire parallel programming research community.

Papers describing experience should indicate how they illustrate general principles; papers about parallel programming foundations should indicate how they relate to practice.

PPoPP 2017 will be in Austin, Texas during February 4-8, 2017, and will be co-located with CGO 2017 and HPCA 2017. Authors should carefully consider the differences among the focus of these conferences when deciding where to submit a paper.

Submissions
All submissions are due August 1, 2016 and must be made electronically through the conference submission site and include an abstract (100–400 words), author contact information, the full list of authors and their affiliations. Full paper submissions must be in PDF formatted for US letter size paper. No extensions will be granted.

Papers should contain a maximum of 11 pages of single-spaced, minimum 10pt font, two-column text, NOT INCLUDING references. There is no page limit for references and they must include the name of all authors (not {et. al.}). Submission is double blind and authors will need identify any potential conflicts of interest with PC and Extended Review Committee members, as defined here: http://www.sigplan.org/Resources/Policies/Review/ (ACM SIGPLAN policy).

For additional information regarding paper submissions, please contact the Program Chair, Lawrence Rauchwerger rwerger@tamu.edu.

We will use a two phase reviewing process. After the first review and rebuttal phase the program committee may decide to relegate the paper or ask for more reviews. Authors will have a chance to view and answer to the questions raised in the second phase of the reviews during the second rebuttal phase.

Poster submissions must conform to the same format restrictions, but may not exceed 2 pages in length. Paper submissions that are not accepted for regular presentations will automatically be considered for posters; authors who do not want their paper considered for the poster session should indicate this in their submission. Two-page summaries of posters will be included in the conference proceedings.

AUTHORS TAKE NOTE: The official publication date is the date the proceedings are made available in the ACM Digital Library. This date may be up to two weeks prior to the first day of your conference. The official publication date affects the deadline for any patent filings related to published work. (For those rare conferences whose proceedings are published in the ACM Digital Library after the conference is over, the official publication date remains the first day of the conference.)

Artifact evaluation
Artifact evaluation has been included in PPoPP 2015 and PPoPP 2016, and will be continued in PPoPP 2017. Authors of accepted papers will be invited to formally submit their supporting materials to the Artifact Evaluation process. The Artifact Evaluation process is run by a separate committee whose task is to assess how the artifacts support the work described in the papers. This submission is voluntary and will not influence the final decision regarding the papers. Papers that go through the Artifact Evaluation process successfully will receive a seal of approval printed on the papers themselves. Authors of accepted papers are encouraged (but not obliged) to make these materials publicly available upon publication of the proceedings, by including them as “source materials” in the ACM Digital Library.
