Call for Papers

The ACM SIGCOMM 2017 conference seeks papers describing significant research contributions to the field of computer and data communication networks. We invite submissions on a wide range of networking research, including, but not limited to:

Network architectures and algorithms
Distributed systems design, implementation & application
Enterprise, datacenter, and storage area networks
SDN, NFV, and network programming
Experimental results from operational networks or network applications
Measurement of and statistics methods/machine learning/dat mining applied to networks
Network monitoring and diagnosis
Formal methods and network verification
Economic aspects of the Internet
Energy-aware communication
Network management and operations
Network security and privacy, censorship, transparency
Network, transport, and application-layer protocols
Fault-tolerance, reliability, and troubleshooting
Operating system and host support for networking
Novel physical layer technologies
Networking hardware (Router/switch/NIC) design
P2P and content (including video) distribution networks
Cloud and wide-area networking systems & infrastructure
Resource management, QoS, and signaling
Routing, traffic engineering, switching, and addressing
Wireless, mobile, and sensor networks
Edge, access, and home networks
Innovative uses of network data beyond communication
In addition to the main conference, SIGCOMM 2017 will have a series of co-located workshops, tutorials, poster and demo sessions, a travel grant program, and conference best paper(s) and SIGCOMM awards. For the criteria for the selection of the conference best paper award(s), see Best Paper Award Guidelines.

Contact Programm Committee Chairs

Submissions

SIGCOMM is a highly selective conference where full papers typically report novel results firmly substantiated by experimentation, deployment, simulation, or analysis. Submissions should be in two-column, 10-point format, and can be up to 12 pages in length with as many additional pages as necessary for references. Detailed submission instructions can be found on the conference web site.

Detailed submission instructions can be found here.

Experience Track

 In addition to submissions considered for the standard track, SIGCOMM 2017 will also include a submission category for experience papers on the design, analysis, and evaluation of techniques in commercial (or otherwise widespread) deployment. Authors must explicitly indicate whether a submission is to be considered for this track or the standard track. (Further information in the detailed submission instructions.)

Ethical Concerns

Authors must as part of the submission process attest that their work complies with all applicable ethical standards of their home institution(s), including, but not limited to privacy policies and policies on experiments involving humans. Note that submitting research for approval by one’s institution’s ethics review body is necessary, but not sufficient – in cases where the PC has concerns about the ethics of the work in a submission, the PC will have its own discussion of the ethics of that work. The PC takes a broad view of what constitutes an ethical concern, and authors agree to be available at any time during the review process to rapidly respond to queries from the PC chairs regarding ethical standards.

 Important dates

January 20, 2017 (5:00pm PST)
Paper title and abstract registration deadline
January 27, 2017 (5:00pm PST)
Complete paper submissions deadline
May 5, 2017
Notification to authors
August 21-25, 2017
Technical Program
Authors Take Note

The official publication date is the date the proceedings are made available in the ACM Digital Library. This date may be up to TWO WEEKS prior to the first day of your conference. The official publication date affects the deadline for any patent filings related to published work.
