Call for Full Papers
The annual SIGIR conference is the major international forum for the presentation of new research results, and the demonstration of new systems and techniques, in the broad field of information retrieval (IR). The 40th ACM SIGIR conference welcomes contributions related to any aspect of information retrieval and access, including theory and foundations, algorithms and applications, and evaluation and analysis. The conference and program chairs invite those working in areas related to IR to submit high-impact original papers for review. Relevant topics include, but are not limited to:

Queries and Query Analysis (e.g., query intent, query understanding, query suggestion and prediction, query representation and reformulation, spoken queries).
Web Search (e.g., ranking at Web scale, link analysis, sponsored search, search advertising, adversarial search and spam, vertical and local search, semantic search, knowledge graphs).
Mining and Modeling Search Activity (e.g., user and task models, click models, log analysis, behavioral analysis, modeling and simulation of information interaction, attention modeling).
Interactive Search (e.g., search interfaces, information access, exploratory search, search context, whole-session support, proactive search, conversational search interaction, intelligent personal assistants, personalized search).
Local and Mobile Search (e.g., location-based search, mobile usage understanding, mobile result presentation, audio and touch interfaces, location context in search).
Retrieval Models and Ranking (e.g., ranking algorithms, learning to rank, language models, retrieval models, combining searches, diversity and aggregated search).
Social Search (e.g., collaborative search, social tagging, crowdsourcing, social networks in search, social media in search, blog and microblog search, forum search).
Filtering and Recommending (e.g., content-based filtering, collaborative filtering, recommender systems, recommendation algorithms, zero-query and implicit search, personalized recommendation).
Evaluation (e.g., user studies, test collections, experimental design, effectiveness measures, session-based evaluation, user engagement).
Document Representation and Content Analysis (e.g., summarization, text representation, linguistic analysis, NLP for search applications, cross- and multi-lingual search, information extraction, opinion mining and sentiment analysis, clustering, classification, topic models).
Question Answering (e.g., factoid and non-factoid question answering, interactive question answering, community-based question answering, question answering systems).
Efficiency and Scalability (e.g., indexing, crawling, compression, search engine architecture, distributed search, metasearch, peer-to-peer search, search in the cloud).
Search in Structured Data (e.g., XML search, ranking in databases, desktop search, entity-oriented search).
Multimedia Search (e.g., image search, video search, speech and audio search, music search).
Other Applications and Specialized Domains (e.g., digital libraries, enterprise, medical, genomics, legal, patent, new retrieval problems including applications of search technology for social good).
Submissions of full research papers must be in English, in PDF format, and should not exceed ten pages in SIGIR two-column format (including references and figures). Suitable LaTeX and Word templates for SIGIR are available from the ACM Website. Full research papers must describe work that is not previously published, not accepted for publication elsewhere, and not currently under review elsewhere (including as a short-paper submission for SIGIR 2017). Submissions should not contain any author identification and should be submitted electronically via the conference submission system. Authors are required to take all reasonable steps to preserve the anonymity of their submission. While authors can upload to institutional or other preprint repositories such as arXiv.org before reviewing is complete, we generally discourage this since it places anonymity at risk (which could result in a negative outcome of the reviewing process). Authors should carefully go through ACM’s authorship policy before submitting a paper.

Important Dates (Timezone: Anywhere on Earth)
January 17, 2017 	Abstracts for full research papers due
January 24, 2017	Full research papers due
April 11, 2017	Full research papers notification
August 8-10, 2017	Main conference
Program Chairs
Hang Li (Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab)
Arjen de Vries (Radboud University)
Ryen White (Microsoft Cortana)
Email: 

Childcare & Nursing Room
A childcare service and nursing room will be available at SIGIR 2017. For more information, please visit http://sigir.org/sigir2017/attend/childcare/.

AUTHORS TAKE NOTE: The official publication date is the date the proceedings are made available in the ACM Digital Library. This date may be up to two weeks prior to the first day of your conference. The official publication date affects the deadline for any patent filings related to published work. (For those rare conferences whose proceedings are published in the ACM Digital Library after the conference is over, the official publication date remains the first day of the conference.)

Call for SIRIP 2017 (Industry Track) Speaker Proposals
Call for Full Papers
Call for Short Papers
Call for Demonstrations
Call for Tutorials
Call for Workshops
Call for Doctoral Consortium Papers
Copyright©2016- Special Interest Group on Information Retrieval / Background Photos: ©Yasufumi Nishi/©JNTO
Inquiry: contact
