Call for Papers
Topics of Interest
SLE aims to be broad-minded and inclusive about relevance and scope. We solicit high-quality contributions in areas ranging from theoretical and conceptual contributions to tools, techniques, and frameworks in the domain of language engineering. Topics relevant to SLE cover generic aspects of software languages development rather than aspects of engineering a specific language. In particular, SLE is interested in principled engineering approaches and techniques in the following areas:

Language Design and Implementation
Approaches and methodologies for language design
Static semantics (e.g., design rules, well-formedness constraints)
Techniques for behavioral / executable semantics
Generative approaches (incl. code synthesis, compilation)
Meta-languages, meta-tools, language workbenches
Language Validation
Verification and formal methods for languages
Testing techniques for languages
Simulation techniques for languages
Language Integration and Composition
Coordination of heterogeneous languages and tools
Mappings between languages (incl. transformation languages)
Traceability between languages
Deployment of languages to different platforms
Language Maintenance
Software language reuse
Language evolution
Language families and variability
Domain-specific approaches for any aspects of SLE (design, implementation, validation, maintenance)
Empirical evaluation and experience reports of language engineering tools - User studies evaluating usability - Performance benchmarks - Industrial applications
Important Dates
All dates are Anywhere on Earth.

Fri 9 Jun 2017 - Abstract Submission (Updated)
Fri 16 Jun 2017 - Paper Submission (Updated)
Fri 4 Aug 2017 - Author Notification
Thu 10 Aug 2017 - Artifact Submission
Fri 1 Sep 2017 - Artifact Notification
Fri 8 Sep 2017 - Camera Ready Deadline
Sun 22 Oct - SLE workshops
Mon 23 Oct - Tue 24 Oct 2017 - SLE Conference
Types of Submissions
Research papers: These should report a substantial research contribution to SLE or successful application of SLE techniques or both. Full paper submissions must not exceed 12 pages including bibliography (in ACM SIGPLAN conference style - acmart).

Tool papers: Because of SLE’s interest in tools, we seek papers that present software tools related to the field of SLE. Selection criteria include originality of the tool, its innovative aspects, and relevance to SLE. Any of the SLE topics of interest are appropriate areas for tool demonstrations. Submissions must provide a tool description of 4 pages including bibliography (in ACM SIGPLAN conference style - acmart), and a demonstration outline including screenshots of up to 6 pages. Tool demonstrations must have the keywords “Tool Demo” or “Tool Demonstration” in the title. The 4-page tool description will, if the demonstration is accepted, be published in the proceedings. The 6-page demonstration outline will be used by the program committee only for evaluating the submission.

Industrial papers: These should describe real-world application scenarios of SLE in industry, explained in their context with an analysis of the challenges that were overcome and the lessons which the audience can learn from this experience. Industry paper submissions must not exceed 6 pages including bibliography (in ACM SIGPLAN conference style - acmart).

New ideas / vision papers: New ideas papers should describe new, non-conventional SLE research approaches that depart from standard practice. They are intended to describe well-defined research ideas that are at an early stage of investigation. Vision papers are intended to present new unifying theories about existing SLE research that can lead to the development of new technologies or approaches. New ideas / vision papers must not exceed 4 pages including bibliography (in ACM SIGPLAN conference style - acmart).

Workshops: Workshops will be organized by SPLASH. Please inform us and contact the SPLASH organizers if you would like to organize a workshop of interest to the SLE audience.

Artifact Evaluation
For the second year SLE will use an evaluation process for assessing the quality of the artifacts on which papers are based to foster the culture of experimental reproducibility. Authors of accepted papers are invited to submit artifacts. For more information, have a look at the Artifact Evaluation page.

Submission
Submissions will be accepted at https://sle17.hotcrp.com.

Publications
All submitted papers will be reviewed by at least three members of the program committee. All accepted papers, including tool papers will be published in ACM Digital Library.

AUTHORS TAKE NOTE: The official publication date is the date the proceedings are made available in the ACM Digital Library. This date may be up to two weeks prior to the first day of the conference. The official publication date affects the deadline for any patent filings related to published work.

Journal Special Issue
Selected accepted papers will be invited to a special issue of the Computer Languages, Systems and Structures (COMLAN) journal.

Awards
Distinguished paper. Award for most notable paper, as determined by the PC chairs based on the recommendations of the programme committee.

Distinguished reviewer. Award for distinguished reviewer, as determined by the PC chairs using feedback from the authors.

Distinguished artifact. Award for the artifact most significantly exceeding expectations, as determined by the AEC chairs based on the recommendations of the artifact evaluation committee.

Concurrent Submissions
Papers must describe unpublished work that is not currently submitted for publication elsewhere as described by SIGPLAN’s Republication Policy. Submitters should also be aware of ACM’s Policy and Procedures on Plagiarism.

Format
(NOTE: NEW FORMAT REQUIREMENTS FOR SLE 2017)

Submissions should use the ACM SIGPLAN Conference Format acmart, 10 point font, with the font family Times New Roman. All submissions should be in PDF format. If you use LaTeX or Word, please use the provided ACM SIGPLAN Templates provided here. Otherwise, follow the author instructions. SLE also follows a single-blind review process.

For authors using LaTeX, you will need to use the acmart LaTeX class (instead of sigplanconf used in the past), with the “sigplan” option in the template. Note that submissions should have a 10 point font. If you are formatting your paper using Word, you may wish to use the provided Word template that supports this font size. Please include page numbers in your submission. Setting the preprint option in the LaTeX \documentclass command generates page numbers. Please also ensure that your submission is legible when printed on a black and white printer. In particular, please check that colors remain distinct and font sizes are legible.

More Information
For fairness reasons, all submitted papers should conform to the above instructions. Submissions that violate these instructions may be rejected without review, at the discretion of the Program Chair.

For additional information, clarification, or answers to questions please contact the organizers by email: sle2017@inria.fr
