Call for papers
The annual ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing (SoCC’17) brings together researchers, developers, users, and practitioners interested in cloud computing. ACM SoCC’17 is the 8th edition of the premier conference on cloud computing; it is the only conference co-sponsored by the ACM Special Interest Groups on Management of Data (SIGMOD) and on Operating Systems (SIGOPS). SoCC will be held in Silicon Valley, to foster connections between the academic and industrial communities operating in the cloud space. We solicit original contributions on all aspects of cloud computing. We particularly encourage submissions on the research, development, practice, and experience of cloud computing systems and data management. Specific topics of interest include but are not limited to the following, when related to the cloud:

Administration and Manageability
Application, Analytics, Database as a Service
Cross Datacenter Data management
Data Services Architectures
Data Markets
Distributed and Parallel Query Processing
Distributed Systems
Energy Efficiency and Management
Fault Tolerance, High Availability, and Reliability
IoT Infrastructure
Large Scale Cloud Applications
Multi-Tenancy
Networking and SDNs
Platform for Services
Privacy of Data and Computation
Programming Models
Provisioning and Metering
Query Optimization
Resource Management
Scientific Data Management
Security of Infrastructure and Services
Service Level Agreements
Storage Systems and New Technologies
Transactional Models
Virtualization, Containers, VMs
Download the CFP as a PDF

Submission categories
Authors can submit a paper in one of the following categories:

Research Papers describe original research, where novelty is a primary consideration.
Experience Papers describe experiences with existing systems, where lessons from the experience are a primary consideration.
Vision Papers describe speculative but well-reasoned and thought-provoking ideas, where insight is a primary consideration.

Submissions will be judged based on their originality, technical merit, relevance, value to the community, and likelihood of producing interesting discussions at the symposium. Submissions will be kept confidential until accepted. Rejected submissions will be kept confidential permanently.

Submission guidelines
Authors must submit original papers that are not being considered for publication in other forums. Submissions cannot be accompanied by nondisclosure, confidentiality, or similar agreements.

Papers that violate the below requirements will be rejected without reviews. Judicious use of color is permitted, but the paper should print clearly in black and white. Non-rejected papers will be shepherded, and final acceptance will be conditional on the shepherd’s approval. Reviewing is single-blind, therefore there is no requirement to conceal authors or organization identities.

Paper format & fonts

Submissions must be in PDF format using 10-point font on 12-point leading, Times-Roman or similar typeface, letter-sized paper, double column, a text block of 6.5 inches wide by 9 inches tall, with numbered pages. A LaTeX template is available here, but authors can use other templates or editors that conform with the requirements. 

Download the Latex Template

Page limit

Submissions can have up to 12 pages for Research and Experience papers, and 6 pages for Vision papers; this limit includes the title, author list, abstract, and appendices, but excludes references.

Paper type

After the author list, papers should indicate the submission type (research, experience, vision).

Posters
Details and deadlines for poster submissions will be available in the call for posters. Papers accepted to the conference are automatically allowed to have a poster.

Deadlines
Registration deadline: 28 Apr 2017 8pm EDT
You can register new submissions until this deadline. 

Submission deadline: 5 May 2017 8pm EDT
Papers must be submitted by this deadline to be reviewed.

Submission site
The paper submission site is now online at https://socc17.hotcrp.com/
