SOSP'17 Call for Papers

The 26th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles seeks to present exciting, innovative research related to the design, implementation, analysis, evaluation, and deployment of computer systems software. SOSP takes a broad view of the systems area and solicits contributions from many fields of systems practice, including, but not limited to, operating systems, file and storage systems, distributed systems, cloud systems, mobile systems, secure systems, embedded systems, dependable systems, system management, and virtualization. We also welcome work that explores the interface to related areas such as computer architecture, networking, programming languages, and databases. In keeping with SOSP tradition, we will favor work that explores new territory, continues a significant research dialogue, or reflects on experience with or measurements of state of the art implementations. Papers of particular merit will be forwarded to ACM Transactions on Computer Systems for possible publication.

Papers will be judged on novelty, significance, clarity, relevance, and correctness. A good paper will:

Consider a significant problem.
Propose and implement an interesting, compelling solution.
Demonstrate the practicality and benefits of the solution.
Draw appropriate conclusions.
Clearly describe what the authors have done.
Clearly articulate the advances beyond previous work.
To facilitate broad technical discussion, all accepted papers will be made available online in advance of the conference.

Author Response Period
SOSP will provide an opportunity for authors to respond to reviews prior to final consideration of the papers at the program committee meeting. Authors must limit their responses to (a) correcting factual errors in the reviews or (b) directly addressing questions posed by reviewers. Responses should be limited to clarifying the submitted work. In particular, responses must not include new experiments or data, describe additional work completed since submission, or promise additional work to follow.

Submission of a response is optional. There is no explicit limit to the response, but authors are strongly encouraged to keep it under 500 words; reviewers are neither required nor expected to read excessively long rebuttals.

Important Dates
Deadline to register abstracts	April 14, 2017 (11:59 PM UTC)
Submission deadline (HARD, NO EXTENSIONS)	April 21, 2017 (11:59 PM UTC)
Author Response	July 20-24, 2017
Acceptance notification	August 7, 2017 (11:59 PM UTC)
Conference	October 28-31, 2017
Submitting A Paper
Click here for the full submission rules.
Click here to submit a paper.

Questions
Please direct any questions to sosp17chairs@umich.edu
