SPAA 2017 Call for Papers

29th ACM Symposium on Parallelism in 
Algorithms and Architectures

July 24 - 26, 2017
Washington D.C., USA

Important Deadlines:

Regular papers:	February 9, 11:59pm EDT
Brief announcements:	February 9, 11:59pm EDT  
Rebuttal period:	March 27-30, 11:59pm EDT
Notification:	April 23
Camera-ready copy due:	May 23
Early Conference Registration:   	TBD
Room Reservation Deadline:	TBD

Submissions are sought in all areas of parallel algorithms and architectures, broadly construed, including both theoretical and experimental perspectives. Topics of interest include, but are not limited to:

Parallel and Distributed Algorithms	Parallel and Distributed Data Structures
Algorithmic Game Theory	Scheduling in Parallel Systems
Parallel/Distributed Issues in Big Data	Parallel and Distributed Architectures and I/O
Streaming Algorithms	Collaborative Learning Algorithms
Network Algorithms	Algorithms for Social Networks
Multiprocessor and Multicore Architectures	Transactional Memory Hardware and Software
Algorithms for GPUs and Other Alternative Parallel Architectures	High-Performance Parallel Computing and Architectures
Green & Power-Efficient Algorithms and Architectures	Instruction Level Parallelism and VLSI
Biological Distributed Algorithms	Mobile, Ad-Hoc, Wireless and Sensor Networks
Algorithms for Routing and Information Dissemination	Peer-to-Peer Systems
Compilers and Tools for Concurrent Programming	Fault-tolerance and Reliability
Self-stabilization and Self-organization	Security and Privacy in Distributed and Parallel Systems
Parallel/Distributed Computational Learning	Parallel Complexity Theory
Specification and Verification of Concurrent Systems	Resource Management and Awareness

Regular Papers:
Regular papers should report on original research, submitted exclusively to this conference. Submissions may not exceed ten (10) single-spaced double-column pages. (Papers will be judged based on their quality and not their length — short papers are welcome.) The title page, bibliography and designated figure pages (containing only figures) are not counted toward the ten pages. (Illustrative figures are encouraged.) All necessary details to substantiate the main claims of the paper should be included in a clearly marked appendix. Regular papers will be allotted up to 10 pages in the proceedings.

Brief announcements:
SPAA also solicits brief announcements that raise issues of interest to the SPAA community. Brief announcements may not exceed three pages and their titles should start with "Brief Announcement:". Examples of good brief announcements include: (i) papers previously published elsewhere of interest to SPAA, (ii) work in progress, (iii) announcement of tools/libraries, (iv) challenge problems posed to the community, (v) corrections to earlier results. Brief announcements may also include smaller results of interest.

All regular rejected papers automatically will be considered for brief announcements. Titles of regular papers which do not want to be considered for this option should start with "Full Paper ONLY:". Brief announcements will be allotted up to 3 pages in the proceedings.

Paper Submissions:
Submitted manuscripts may not exceed ten (10) single-spaced double-column pages for regular papers and three (3) single-spaced double-column pages for brief announcements, using 10-point size font on 8.5x11 inch pages, not counting the title page, bibliography and designated figure pages ). The title page should contain the title, author names and affiliations, followed by a brief abstract. See http://www.acm.org/sigs/publications/proceedings-templates (version 2.8, May 2015) for details, including the sig-alternate-05-2015.cls style file and a sample file. Additional details may be added in a clearly marked appendix that will be read at the discretion of the program committee. Please indicate in the title of your manuscript whether this is a regular paper or a brief announcement.

Regular papers submitted to SPAA may not be under simultaneous consideration for a journal or any conference or workshop with published proceedings (other than as a brief announcement for a previous conference).

Authors are encouraged to post full versions of their submissions in a freely accessible on-line repository such as the arxiv, the ECCC, or the Cryptology ePrint archive. We expect that authors of accepted regular papers will make full versions of their papers, with proofs, available by the camera-ready deadline. (This should be done in a manner consistent with the ACM Copyright Policy.)

The deadline for ALL submissions is February 9.

Rebuttal Period:
There will be a rebuttal period during which the authors can point out misunderstandings or comment on critical questions that the PC members may have. It will take place on March 27-30.

Notification:
Authors will be sent notification of acceptance or rejection by e-mail on or before April 23. A camera-ready copy of each accepted abstract must be prepared according to the ACM guidelines for inclusion in the proceedings of the conference and must be received by the date to be determined later.

Awards:
Every regular paper is eligible for the best paper award. The program committee may decline to make this award or may split the award among multiple papers.

Program Chair
Mohammad Hajiaghayi (University of Maryland, College Park) 
Program Committee
Umut Acar	(Carnegie Mellon University) 
Susanne Albers	(Technical University of Munich) 
Hossein Asadi	(Sharif University of Technology) 
Nikhil Bansal	(Eindhoven University of Technology) 
Hossein Bateni	(Google Research) 
Petra Berenbrink	(Simons Fraser University) 
Keren Censor-Hillel	(Technion) 
Hubert Chan	(The University of Hong Kong) 
Rajesh Chitnis	(Weizmann Institute of Science) 
Frank Dehne	(Carleton University) 
Martin Farach-Colton	(Rutgers University) 
Pierre Fraigniaud	(CNRS and University Paris Diderot) 
Mohsen Ghaffari	(ETH Zurich) 
Michael Goodrich	(University of California, Irvine) 
Fabrizio Grandoni	(IDSIA) 
Mohammad Hajiaghayi (chair)	(University of Maryland, College Park) 
Martin Hoefer	(MPI Informatik, Saarbrücken) 
Samir Khuller	(University of Maryland) 
Ravi Kumar	(Google Research) 
Silvio Lattanzi	(Google Research) 
Aleksander Mądry	(MIT) 
Friedhelm Meyer auf der Heide	(Paderborn University) 
Vahab Mirrokni	(Google Research) 
Morteza Monemizadeh	(Rutgers University) 
Seffi Naor	(Technion) 
Boaz Patt-Shamir	(Tel Aviv University) 
Richard Peng	(Georgia Institute of Technology) 
Giuseppe Persiano	(Università di Salerno) 
Cynthia A Phillips	(Sandia National Laboratories) 
Yuval Rabani	(The Hebrew University of Jerusalem) 
Rachid Guerraoui	(EPFL) 
Harald Räcke	(TU München) 
Rajmohan Rajaraman	(Northeastern University) 
Mauricio Resende	(Amazon) 
Laura Sanità	(University of Waterloo) 
Alex Slivkins	(Microsoft Research, NYC) 
Peter Varman	(Rice University) 
Roger Wattenhofer	(ETH Zurich) 
Ryan Williams	(Stanford University and MIT) 
David Woodruff	(IBM Almaden Research Center) 
SPAA General Chair
Christian Scheideler, University of Paderborn
SPAA Secretary
Jeremy Fineman, Georgetown University
SPAA Treasurer
David Bunde, Knox College
SPAA Publicity Chair
Nodari Sitchinava, University of Hawaii at Manoa
Local Arrangements Chair
Jeremy Fineman, Georgetown University
Calvin Newport, Georgetown University
