How to Submit

Posters should be submitted through: https://systor17posters.hotcrp.com/

Highlight papers should be submitted to: highlight@systor.org

Important Dates

Full and Short Papers Track
Paper Submission	February 28, 2017
Acceptance Notification	March 29, 2017
Camera-ready	April 26, 2017
 
Highlight Papers Track
Extended Abstract Submission	March 29, 2017
Acceptance Notification	April 24, 2017
 
Posters Track
Extended Abstract Submission	March 22, 2017
Acceptance Notification	April 5, 2017
Camera-ready	April 26, 2017
 
Conference	May 22-24, 2017
Call for Papers

We invite you to submit your work for presentation at SYSTOR 2017, the 10th ACM International Systems and Storage Conference. The conference will take place May 22–24, 2017 in Haifa, Israel.

SYSTOR organizers aim to provide an excellent international forum for interaction across the systems research community, appealing and useful to academic and industrial researchers, welcoming both students and seasoned professionals. Following this goal, SYSTOR 2017 will host distinguished keynote speakers and offer an interactive poster session as well as social events.

A list of Program Committee members can be found here.

SYSTOR promotes experimental and practical computer systems research and welcomes both academic and industrial contributions, including the following topics:

Operating systems, computer architecture, and their interactions
Distributed, parallel, and cloud systems
Networked, mobile, wireless, peer-to-peer, and sensor systems
Runtime systems and compiler/programming-language support
File and storage systems
Security, privacy, and trust
Virtualization
Embedded and real-time systems
Fault tolerance, reliability, and availability
Deployment, usage, and experience
Performance evaluation and workload characterization
SYSTOR 2017 solicits submissions in four separate categories:

Full Papers Track - original research, at most 10 pages without the references
Short Papers Track - original research, at most 5 pages without the references
Highlight Papers Track - papers accepted at top-tier conferences
Posters Track - original work presented as poster accompanied by the extended abstract
Formatting instructions

For the Full and Short Paper Tracks, please follow paper formatting instructions. The author kit, which contains the Latex style and template, is available here.

For the Posters Track, please follow poster formatting instructions. The author kit, which contains the Latex style and template, is available here.

Camera Ready Instructions

Authors of papers and posters accepted for publication should follow these instructions to their work for inclusion in ACM proceedings.

The corresponding author of the accepted paper or poster (the first by default) will receive an automated email from rightsreview@acm.org regarding the ACM copyright. If you haven't, please check your spam folders and/or contact our publication chair Aviad Zuck at aviadzuc@cs.technion.ac.il.

After all the authors complete the copyright form, the correct rights management text and bibliographic strip will be mailed to the corresponding author, to be placed in the publishable document. Please follow the paper formatting instructions above. The detailed ACM Computing Classification System can be found at http://www.acm.org/about/class/class/2012.

The final publishable versions should be uploaded to the submission website by April 26th. In order to upload, select "Edit paper", and then upload it to the "Final version".
