Research Papers: Call for Papers
Virtualization has a central role in modern systems. It constitutes a key aspect in a wide range of environments, from small mobile computing devices to large-scale data centers and computational clouds. Virtualization techniques encompass the underlying hardware, the operating system, and the runtime system. Although these layers have different design and implementation techniques, the fundamental challenges and insights tend to be similar.

The 13th ACM SIGPLAN/SIGOPS International Conference on Virtual Execution Environments (VEE’17) brings together researchers and practitioners from different computer systems domains to interact and share ideas in order to advance the state of the art of virtualization and broaden its applicability. VEE’17 accepts both full-length and short papers. Both types of submissions are reviewed to the same standards and differ primarily in the scope of the ideas expressed. Short papers are limited to half the space of full-length papers. The program committee will not accept a full paper on the condition that it is cut down to fit in a short paper slot, nor will it invite short papers to be extended to full length. Submissions will be considered only in the category in which they are submitted.

Short papers are relatively new to VEE. An ideal short paper would express an idea that doesn’t require 12 pages to describe or evaluate. The ideas should be well formed and complete just like those in a full-length paper. A short paper should not be a HotOS / HotStorage-style workshop paper with an interesting idea that isn’t yet fully developed. Short papers will be held to the same standard as full-length papers in terms of clarity of presentation and evaluation, however, the scope of the work as well as the breadth of the evaluation is expected to be smaller.

We invite authors to submit original papers related to virtualization across all layers of the software stack down to the microarchitectural level. Topics of interest include (but are not limited to):

architecture support for virtualization;
compiler and programming language support for virtualization;
managed runtimes and virtual machines;
management technologies for virtual environments;
memory management;
operating system support for virtualization;
performance analysis and debugging for virtual environments;
runtime system support for virtualization;
security and virtual environments
virtual I/O, storage, and networking;
virtualization in cloud computing
virtualization support for programs and programmers;
virtualization technologies applied to specific problem domains such as HPC, realtime, and power management.
Submission Guidelines
Please submit your paper through this link after reading the following submission instructions.

Submissions must attack an interesting problem and clearly articulate their contribution relative to previous work. Submissions must be in ACM SIGPLAN proceedings format, 10-point type on 11-point leading, 7x9 inch text block, and two columns with .33 inch column separation, and submissions may not exceed 12 pages for full papers and 6 pages for short papers, excluding references. Word and LaTeX templates for this format are available at www.sigplan.org/authorInformation.htm (but please note that 10-point is not the default). Pages must be numbered, and submissions must be in PDF, legible when printed black and white on US Letter and A4 paper. All fonts must be embedded in the submitted PDF. Submissions violating the formatting guidelines may be rejected without review.

Reviewing will be double blind, therefore submissions must be anonymous. Author names, affiliations, acknowledgments, and any other hints of identity must not be included in the submission. You should not anonymize your bibliographic references; instead, cite your work in the third person so that your submission is self-contained. Make a good-faith effort to conceal any authorship connection between prior work and yours.

Submissions must describe unpublished work that is not currently submitted for publication elsewhere as discussed at www.sigplan.org/Resources/Policies/Republication. Authors of accepted papers will be required to sign an ACM copyright release. The proceedings will be published by ACM.

AUTHORS TAKE NOTE: The official publication date is the date the proceedings are made available in the ACM Digital Library. This date may be up to two weeks prior to the first day of your conference. The official publication date affects the deadline for any patent filings related to published work. (For those rare conferences whose proceedings are published in the ACM Digital Library after the conference is over, the official publication date remains the first day of the conference.)

Please ensure that your paper satisfies all the above requirements for content and formatting before submission; if you have a question about any of these issues, please send email to the program chairs using this email: vee17chairs@acm.org.
